777177

research-article2018

CRXXXX10.1177/0093650218777177Communication ResearchGuo and Vargo

Article

“Fake News” and Emerging
Online Media Ecosystem:
An Integrated Intermedia
Agenda-Setting Analysis of
the 2016 U.S. Presidential
Election

Communication Research
2020, Vol. 47(2) 178­–200
© The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/0093650218777177
DOI: 10.1177/0093650218777177
journals.sagepub.com/home/crx

Lei Guo1 and Chris Vargo2

Abstract
This study examined how fake news, misinformation, and satire, affected the emerging
media ecosystem during the 2016 U.S. presidential election through an integrated
intermedia agenda-setting analysis, which studies broad attributes and myopic stories
and events. A computer-assisted content analysis of millions of news articles was
conducted alongside a qualitative analysis of popular news headlines and articles. The
results showed that websites that spread misinformation had a fairly close intermedia
agenda-setting relationship with fact-based media in covering Trump, but not for the
news about Clinton. Satire websites barely interacted with the agenda of other media
outlets. Overall, it seemed that rather than playing a unique agenda-setting role in
this emerging media landscape, fake news websites added some noise to an already
sensationalized news environment.
Keywords
intermedia agenda setting, fake news, online news, computer-assisted content
analysis, presidential election
“Fake news,” or news that is factually false or contains misleading content, gained
unprecedented spotlight during the 2016 U.S. presidential election. While using fake
1Boston University, USA
2University of Colorado Boulder, USA

Corresponding Author:
Lei Guo, Division of Emerging Media Studies, College of Communication, Boston University, 640
Commonwealth Ave, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
Email: guolei@bu.edu

Guo and Vargo

179

content for political purposes is not new (Linebarger, 1948), with modern communication technologies, the barriers to entry have never been lower. Anyone can set up a
website propagating conspiracy theories or distribute a fictional story on social media
purporting to be real news. Indeed, “fake news” has become a business. Researchers
and journalists have identified hundreds of websites that are dedicated to peddling
fake and biased content (e.g., Zimdars, 2016).
Most of the research addressing fake news thus far focuses on the direct effects of
fake news on audience (e.g., Allcott & Gentzkow, 2017; Silverman & Singer-Vine,
2016). Here we contend it is equally important to examine the role fake news plays in
the overall media ecosystem. The problem at stake is not only about whether people
believe fake news as truth. It is also crucial for academics and journalists alike to
understand how “fake news” influences “real news,” which speaks to the status quo of
American journalism.
An intermedia agenda-setting perspective is helpful to examine the transfer of content between fake news websites and other media outlets. A seminal study (Vargo,
Guo, & Amazeen, 2018) revealed that fake news websites appear to have an intricately
entwined relationship with fact-based news media, responding to and setting each
other’s agendas. The study empirically showed that fake news could redirect the focus
of legitimate media, pushing the public’s attention away from issues that might otherwise be more important. Still, the critical question that remains unanswered is how
exactly fake news websites and fact-based media react to each other. Do fake news
websites fabricate stories and generate lies that credible media then adopt and report
as facts? This granularity has not been addressed in the research. To fill the gap, this
article examines intermedia agenda setting between fake news websites and other
media outlets at both the macro and micro level. Specifically, an integrated intermedia
agenda-setting approach was used to examine issues, attributes, and specific stories
that were popular during the 2016 U.S. presidential election. The Global Database of
Events, Language, and Tone (GDELT) dataset was used to perform a computerassisted analysis of millions of articles (Leetaru, 2015). The breadth of the big data
analysis is supplemented with a nuanced qualitative analysis where popular news
headlines and articles are extracted and analyzed. Results of the study help empirically
trace the practice and influence of fake news websites during a controversial election
and advance intermedia agenda-setting theory by explicating the extent to which fake
news has changed the emerging media ecology.

Fake News: Definitions, Motivations, and Popularity
While the phenomenon of fake news and misinformation has a long tradition, the term
fake news has risen in prominence only recently and its meanings have pluralized. In
perhaps the most detailed explication of the concept, Wardle (2017) extrapolates seven
conditions in which news can be fake. News can be (1) satire and created for entertainment. News can (2) intentionally mislead by selectively disclosing facts or information. Similarly, (3) fake news can go beyond selectively disclosing information to
intentionally making false connections (e.g., stringing together a pattern of events to

180

Communication Research 47(2)

suggest a conspiracy). Along those lines, (4) news can also imply a context to a story,
photo, or video that is untrue to advance a narrative that is false or (5) manipulate
photos, quotes, or facts altogether to paint a false picture. Further down the spectrum,
fake news can have no origin and be (6) completely fabricated and entirely false.
Finally, beyond the reporting itself, fake news can also deceive on the medium (e.g.,
website) level by (7) acting as an imposter and fooling audiences into thinking their
platform is a well-known source. Similarly, in a review of current academic literature
on fake news, Tandoc, Lim, and Ling (2018) developed a typology to discern between
different types of fake news. They found that fake news refers to news satire, news
parody, fabrication, manipulation, propaganda, and advertising. To further complicate
this definition, others have recently pointed out that President Trump and citizens alike
have used the term to attempt to delegitimize and erode the credibility of established
journalistic organizations (Albright, 2016).
Because of the wide range of uses for the term, it is unfeasible to examine the use
of fake news in all contexts in one study. Here “fake news” refers to two broad categories of news that encompass a majority of the aforementioned types: misinformation
and satire. We define misinformation as information that intentionally contains false or
misleading elements incorporated within its content or context (Allcott & Gentzkow,
2017; Bakir & McStay, 2018). Fake news that contains misinformation is particularly
problematic because of its “potential to unduly influence attitudes and behavior, leading people to think and act differently than they would if they were correctly informed”
(Southwell, Thorson, & Sheble, 2018, p. 2).
News can also be intentionally fake, but not aiming to mislead. Here we consider a
second category of fake news, satire, as news created for entertainment. In his investigation of a well-known satire organization, The Onion, Waisanen (2011) found the
structure and delivery of news reporting to be remarkably similar to other news media.
However, the content also mixed in an aura of fiction, mostly through comic tweaks of
the content. While satire may be either partially or wholly false, they are created with
“the assumption that both the author and the reader of the news share the gag” (Tandoc
et al., 2018, p. 6). That is, while satire is also built upon some degree of bending facts,
the immediate intention of satire authors is not to deceive its audience that fake news
they see is real. However, Internet users may not always recognize news satire as such.
In particular, sharing news on social media can obscure the origin of the media content, making it possible that satire will be mistaken for real news (Emery, 2018).
Despite its intentions, satire may mislead news consumers just like misinformation
would do in an online environment. Therefore, we also consider the effects of satire in
this study and, like Tandoc et al. (2018), we adopt the distinction of author intention
as the key distinction between news satire and misinformation.
In this study, the term fake news website refers to any website that carries a considerable level of fake news, misinformation, or satire. In other words, a fake news website invariably contains facts, but the majority of its content is false or misleading. We
term news media that adhere to factual reporting based on well-sourced evidence as
fact-based news media. It is however important to note that all news is socially constructed (Shoemaker & Reese, 2011), and fact-based news media can be biased too.

Guo and Vargo

181

Recent research has begun to uncover the motivations behind the rise of fake news
in recent years. Fake news is often created for political gain. Dating back to World War
II, propaganda exerted powerful influences on audiences (Linebarger, 1948). The role
of partisanship in American life appears to be driving the resurgence of fake news
(Townsend, 2016). Others may create fake news websites with the prospect that sensational information appeals to large, passionate bases of news readers. Web content
with large amounts of traffic can be easily monetized to generate substantial advertising revenue. Another important factor that has afforded the rise of fake news is the
increasing ease in which news can now be “created” on the Internet (Waschke, 2017).
Fake news sites can simply steal, repurpose, and alter existing news content, which
drastically reduces the time and effort required to run a “news” website.
Many blame social media for the rapid growth of fake news. Twitter, for example,
allows for the spread of misinformation via automated, anonymous accounts (Zubiaga,
Aker, Bontcheva, Liakata, & Procter, 2018). Just as partisanship and other ideologies
drive news readership, they also motivate real people to share fake news on social
platforms (Mihailidis & Viotty, 2017). Yet social media is not the only culprit for the
problem. Fact-based media have also been found to facilitate the viral spread of misinformation (Rojecki & Meraz, 2016). Just as news travels from person to person on
social media, news content has been shown to transfer between different media outlets. What has been largely unstudied is the degree to which fake news websites are
also involved in this process. To examine this effect, we adopt a theoretical framework, intermedia agenda setting, and use it to consider the dynamics of news, fake and
real, in this emerging media landscape.

Intermedia Agenda Setting
While agenda-setting theory asserts that the news media will affect the public opinion,
another line of research turns inward to assess who sets the media agenda. Research
has found that journalist decision-making can be influenced by public relations efforts,
political campaigns, and social media (e.g., Kiousis, Popescu, & Mitrook, 2007;
Parmelee, 2014). In addition, different media organizations may also influence each
other’s news agenda, described as intermedia agenda setting (IAS; McCombs, 2004).
The leading thought was that often times news flows from elite news media such as
The New York Times and The Washington Post to other media outlets (Reese &
Danielian, 1989). There are no less than three possible reasons as to why IAS exists.
First, while journalists have been trained to report on stories with news values, they
often look at their peers to validate their sense of newsworthiness (McCombs, 2004).
In particular, smaller media depend on major news organizations and wire services for
story ideas, considering the latter’s news judgment as authoritative (Denham, 2014).
Second, the intense competition of the news market creates pressure for editors and
journalists to closely monitor the practices of other news media to avoid “missing” any
important story (Lim, 2011; Tuchman, 1978). IAS may also occur for economic reasons. Borrowing media content requires fewer resources than generating original content. This is especially true for small news organizations with limited funding (Baum

182

Communication Research 47(2)

& Groeling, 2008). In all, journalistic co-orientation and market pressure alike have
been thought to homogenize the news landscape.
The emerging media landscape has seen a massive proliferation of media outlets.
However, the diversity of media platforms does not necessarily translate to the diversity of content offered. News media online still share a highly similar news agenda and
IAS continues to take place online (Vargo & Guo, 2017; Lim, 2011). It is likely that
the aforementioned reasons will motivate fake news websites to follow the agenda of
other news media, especially elite ones. However, online IAS is not one-directional.
Elite news media are no longer the sole opinion leader in the current media environment; rather, they may adopt the agenda of less established, niche media. Recent
research showed that political blogs and online partisan news websites could predict
the news coverage of other media, reflecting the overall polarization of media coverage in the United States (Vargo & Guo, 2017; Meraz, 2011). In Austria, while the
websites of “quality” media performed as the main agenda-setter, tabloid media were
able to take the lead in covering certain issues (Vonbun, Königslöw, & Schoenbach,
2016). As these studies illustrated, media that produce sensational, biased content may
have become more competitive in this new media market. When sensationalism dominates the media landscape, it would be logical to assume that fake news may attract the
attention of some fact-based media, either driven by the pressure not to miss a story, or
to generate revenues. Taken together, either scenario is plausible, and little is known
about the direction in which news travels—fake-to-real or real-to-fake.
Vargo et al. (2018) is the first known attempt to empirically examine the IAS relationship between fake news websites and fact-based news media. The study showed
that fake news had a reciprocal relationship with different genres of fact-based media
between 2014 and 2016. The research shed some initial insight into the IAS power of
fake news. However, by merely focusing on the transfer of broad issue categories, the
study failed to provide concrete examples to understand how the media responded to
each other. For instance, we now know that whenever fake news reports international
relations, fact-based media are also likely to report on international relations. Yet it is
unclear which specific international relations stories actually had that effect. In 2016,
did fake news agendas alter the ways in which candidates were portrayed in other
media—an attribute-level agenda setting? More importantly, if a story did originate
from a fake news website, did fact-based media repeat stories with the same factual
errors, or did they cover the story in an attempt to refute the misinformation? Nuance
is needed to determine how exactly fake news muddies the emerging media ecology.
In addition, Vargo et al. (2018) did not distinguish between misinformation and satire,
two different types of fake news websites. As discussed earlier, while websites that
spread misinformation intend to mislead their users, satire websites may just exist for
entertainment purposes. Berkowitz and Schwartz (2016) even argued that satire websites became part of the “Fifth Estate,” serving as watchdogs of the Fourth Estate—
fact-based media—or people in power. To build on Vargo et al. (2018) and to uncover
nuances not addressed in their analysis, this study sought to examine the news coverage of political candidates in the 2016 U.S. presidential election and to explicate the
impact of the two types of fake news websites via a more comprehensive IAS approach.

Guo and Vargo

183

Attribute IAS
IAS can happen at different levels. The first level of IAS focuses on the transfer of
objects, or a set of issues, between different news agendas. The second level further
examines the attributes that describe a certain object, suggesting that news media
would not only track each other in deciding which object to cover, but also how they
cover the object (McCombs, 2004). Researchers have long applied the theoretical
framework to analyze media effects related to the images of political candidates, in
which objects are candidates and attributes are traits that define the image of candidates. Specifically, attributes can be analyzed in several dimensions. The substantive
dimension of attributes refers to characteristics of news that help the audience cognitively structure news and discern among various topics (Kiousis, Bantimaroudis, &
Ban, 1999). Examples of substantive attributes that define political candidate images
are candidates’ personalities, qualifications, and issue positions (McCombs, Llamas,
Lopez-Escobar, & Rey, 1997). Here, we examined the salience transfer of political
candidates’ issue positions between fact-based and fake media. In the 2016 election,
both Trump and Clinton were associated with a number of issues that were fabricated
or distorted, and widely disseminated.
The affective dimension of attributes, on the contrary, refers to those aspects of
news coverage that would elicit emotional reactions from audience members (Kiousis
et al., 1999), which is typically operationalized as the positive, neutral, or negative
coverage of an object such as a political candidate. Previous research showed that both
positive and negative feelings could be transmitted between media outlets (McCombs,
2004). Given that fake news embraces sensationalism and emotional manipulation, it
is reasonable to assume that IAS between fake and fact-based media can also occur at
the affective level.
As discussed above, fake news websites may set the agenda of fact-based media
and vice versa. Taking fact-based media as a whole, Vargo et al. (2018) found that the
salience of major issues was more likely to be transferred from fact-based media to
fake news websites. However, the agenda-setting effect might not be the same for
attribute agenda setting. In addition, websites that spread misinformation (“misinformation websites” hereafter) and satire websites may exhibit different patterns when
interacting with fact-based media. Therefore, we asked the following questions:
Research Question 1 (RQ1): Will the coverage of substantive attributes of Trump
(RQ1a) and Clinton (RQ1b) in misinformation websites predict, or follow, the
agenda of fact-based media?
Research Question 2 (RQ2): Will the affective coverage of Trump (RQ2a) and Clinton
(RQ2b) in misinformation websites predict, or follow, the agenda of fact-based media?
Research Question 3 (RQ3): Will the coverage of substantive attributes of Trump
(RQ3a) and Clinton (RQ3b) in satire websites predict, or follow, the agenda of factbased media?
Research Question 4 (RQ4):Will the affective coverage of Trump (RQ4a) and
Clinton (RQ4b) in satire websites predict, or follow, the agenda of fact-based media?

184

Communication Research 47(2)

In a hyper-partisan political atmosphere, fake news may have a particularly intricate relationship with partisan media. News consumers prefer news sources that are
aligned with their own political preferences, an effect known as selective exposure
(Iyengar & Hahn, 2009; Stroud, 2010). However, research also showed that one-sided
news exposure may be confined to a small segment of the population who are activists
(Guess, 2016). Whether partisan media contribute a more polarized America is uncertain (see Prior, 2013, for a review). Still, the proliferation of partisan media online does
provide a backdrop for the rising popularity of fake news. As mentioned above, most
fake news websites are themselves partisan in nature. Rojecki and Meraz (2016)
showed that partisan media facilitated the viral spread of partisan misinformation in
the 2004 U.S. presidential election. The trend was confirmed in Vargo et al.’s (2018)
study, which found that partisan media both set and reacted to the issue agenda of fake
news websites, more so than other types of media outlets. Therefore, we hypothesize
the following:
Hypothesis 1 (H1): Misinformation websites and partisan media will have a reciprocal relationship in covering substantive attributes of Trump (H1a) and Clinton
(H1b).
Hypothesis 2 (H2): Misinformation websites and partisan media will have a reciprocal relationship in covering affective attributes of Trump (H2a) and Clinton
(H2b).
Hypothesis 3 (H3): Compared with nonpartisan media, partisan media will have a
greater reciprocal relationship with misinformation websites in the coverage of
Trump (H3a) and Clinton (H3b).
Hypothesis 4 (H4): Satire websites and partisan media will have a reciprocal relationship in covering substantive attributes of Trump (H4a) and Clinton (H4b).
Hypothesis 5 (H5): Satire websites and partisan media reciprocal relationship in
covering affective attributes of Trump (H5a) and Clinton (H5b).
Hypothesis 6 (H6): Compared with nonpartisan media, partisan media will have a
greater reciprocal relationship with satire websites in the coverage of Trump (H6a)
and Clinton (H6b).
Furthermore, partisan media of different political orientations—conservative or
liberal—may behave differently in their interactions with news websites. In Rojecki
and Meraz’s (2016) analysis, conservative websites were responsible for transmitting misinformation against both Democratic and Republican candidates, whereas
liberal media only contributed to the propagation of misinformation about a
Republican candidate. The results suggested that conservative media are more susceptible to the influence of fake news. Faris et al.’s (2017) study also showed that
a right-wing media network anchored around Breitbart successfully set the agenda
for the conservative media sphere, a pattern not found in left-oriented online sites.
Vargo et al. (2018), however, found that fake news was more likely to predict the
issue agenda of liberal media. Given the mixed findings, we asked the following
questions:

Guo and Vargo

185

Research Question 5 (RQ5): Is the coverage of substantive attributes of Trump
(RQ5a) and Clinton (RQ5b) in misinformation websites more likely to predict, or
follow, conservative or liberal media?
Research Question 6 (RQ6): Is the coverage of affective attributes of Trump
(RQ6a) and Clinton (RQ6b) in misinformation websites more likely to predict, or
follow, conservative or liberal media?
Research Question 7 (RQ7): Is the coverage of substantive attributes of Trump
(RQ7a) and Clinton (RQ7b) in satire websites more likely to predict, or follow,
conservative or liberal media?
Research Question 8 (RQ8): Is the coverage of affective attributes of Trump
(RQ8a) and Clinton (RQ8b) in satire websites more likely to predict, or follow,
conservative or liberal media?

A Fine-Grained Approach of IAS
Beyond objects and attributes, Welbers (2016) further articulated the transfer of news
content at different granularity: An agenda item can be measured as an event, a story,
or a theme. Take Trump’s statements on immigration as an example. An example of
event is “House approved spending bills to start Trump’s border wall” or “Trump pressured Mexico on border wall payment.” All events related to Trump’s wall statements
can be grouped together as components of the same story: Trump’s promise to build a
border wall between the United States and Mexico. At an even more coarse-grained
level, similar stories can be grouped to a theme: immigration.
The decision of using which level of agenda items to measure IAS is not only methodological, but also has important conceptual implications (Welbers, 2016). The
majority of IAS research has taken the theme-based approach. The rationale is that
news media would follow each other for the most relevant and timely themes. For
example, if elite media recurrently report on Trump’s position on immigration during
an election campaign, other media may consider immigration an important topic and
thus would also cover stories and events under the theme of immigration. This traditional approach helps to examine whether journalists monitor each other to validate
their sense of news overall, one reason of IAS as mentioned above. To determine
whether news media borrow story ideas from each other, measuring media effects at a
story and an event level is needed. Such a nuanced approach has been rarely employed
in IAS research with a few exceptions. Meraz (2011) examined three high-profile
stories in her analysis of the relationship between political blogs and traditional news
entities. More recently, Welbers (2016) and Harder, Sevenans, and Van Aelst (2017)
advocated for a “news story” approach, contending that future IAS research needs to
develop more fine-grained methods to study “who follows whom.” This argument is
relevant to the IAS analysis that involves fake news. To explore how fake news alters
the emerging media ecology, it is crucial to shift the unit of analysis to the story and
event level to assess whether fake news websites steal story ideas from mainstream
media and, reversely, whether and how fact-based media react to fabricated or distorted stories and events covered in fake news websites. As such, in addition to

186

Communication Research 47(2)

examining attribute-based IAS (theme level), this study further measures IAS at the
story and event level:
Research Question 9 (RQ9): How do fake news websites, misinformation and
satire websites, and different types of fact-based media interact with each other at
the level of stories and events?

Method
This study assesses IAS between fake news websites and fact-based media during the
2016 U.S. presidential election. The sampled time period ranged from September 1st
to November 22nd, two weeks after the Election Day. The analysis leverages a comprehensive collection of news: GDELT’s Global Knowledge Graph (GKG) dataset
(Leetaru, 2015). GDELT provides daily descriptive analysis of news coverage and
publishes datasets that identify people, themes, and events. GDELT gathers stories
from all national and international news from Google News and allows researchers to
computationally analyze news content of varying types. The dataset has been widely
used in peer-reviewed academic studies across disciplines such as political science and
communication research (e.g., Hammond & Weidmann, 2014; Vargo et al., 2018).

Identify News Outlets
The first step was to identify news outlets for analysis. To reiterate, we consider two
types of fake news: misinformation and satire. A website was considered to be fake if
it carried a considerable level of fake news. Here we follow Vargo et al.’s (2018)
approach of extracting content of fake news websites from GDELT by leveraging
Hoaxy’s list of fake news sites from nine different sources (https://hoaxy.iuni.iu.edu/
faq.html). These nine sources’ definitions of fake news websites are slightly different,
but in general, the identified websites contain content that fall under Wardle’s (2017)
description. For example, a well-cited list generated by Melissa Zimdars, a journalism
professor, includes satire news websites, sources that entirely fabricate information,
sources that promote conspiracy theories, and clickbait websites. Fake News Watch
lists three types of fake news websites: fake/hoax news website, satire websites, and
clickbait websites. To include the most widely accepted fake sources, we only include
websites that are identified in at least two out of the nine sources in the list. In doing
so, smaller websites (e.g., flyheight.com and anonews.co) were excluded. Then, we
categorized the identified news websites into satire and misinformation websites. A
website was considered a satire news website if at least two sources categorized it as
such. The nature of one website nationalreport.net remains controversial in that
Zimdar’s list labeled it as both “satire” and “fake” (i.e., sources that fabricate information) and other sources suggested that the intention of the site is to deceive gullible
Internet users. Given the disagreement, it is considered a misinformation website in
this study. According to the nine sources, the remaining websites frequently publish
wholly false news or misleading content and thus were categorized as misinformation

Guo and Vargo

187

websites. It is important to note that it is methodologically challenging to distinguish
between misinformation and satire websites without actually interviewing website
owners to reveal their true intentions.
Vargo et al. (2018) also offers a list of fact-based news websites by type, which was
completed through a manual content analysis of the top 2,760 U.S. news media websites found in GDELT. In line with the previous research, this study included websites
of five types of fact-based media: elite media (n = 2), other traditional media (n =
1,911), news agencies (n = 2), online-only partisan (27 conservative and 29 liberaloriented), and online-only emerging media (n = 765).1 In Vargo et al. (2018), a group
of coders were involved in coding media sources. Coders studied “each site, searching
the Internet for claims from credible news organizations or media watchdogs asserting
that a given site was indeed partisan or to see whether a site self-identified as partisan”
(Vargo et al., 2018, p. 9). They reached an intercoder reliability of 0.988 Krippendorff’s
alpha (α) for general media categorization and 1 for partisanship.
It should be noted that the boundary between fake news websites and fact-based
media, especially partisan media, is unclear. We conceptualize a website as a fake
news website if it carries a considerable level of fake news, but operationalizing “a
considerable level” is methodologically challenging. For example, Breitbart was
treated as a conservative media outlet in previous research (e.g., Meraz, 2009) but has
been accused of regularly disseminating fake news and conspiracy theory. In this
study, two sources from Hoaxy’s list—Zamdars and The Daily Dot—identify Breitbart
as a fake news outlet, which thus is categorized as a misinformation website in this
study. We, however, do acknowledge that this is an arbitrary classification, an issue
future research should address.

Coding for Substantive and Affective Attributes
To examine attribute agenda setting, this study analyzes substantive and affective attributes
that are associated with Trump and Clinton, respectively. GDELT identifies “proper
names” through named-entity detection (Leetaru, 2015). This extracts names of persons
mentioned in news stories. As such, we relied on GDELT’s detection system to only inspect
articles that mentioned the two candidates. GDELT also comprises “themes” that cluster
news content together, covering a broad range of issues and attributes. Vargo et al.’s (2018)
has taken the theme categorization and arranged the themes in a way that broadly encompasses major issues in U.S. news coverage between 2014 and 2016. We revised the list of
issues as it pertained to the 2016 election: taxes, unemployment, economy, trade, terrorism,
military, international relations, immigration/refugees, health care, gun control, drug,
police system, racism, civil liberties, environment, education, party politics, election fraud,
and media/Internet. These 19 issues are operationalized as issue positions, or substantive
attributes, associated with the two candidates. In addition, GDELT also possesses affective
attributes similar to those studied in attribute agenda-setting research (McCombs et al.,
1997). To create the positive attribute, we included news stories that discussed the candidate plus the “Charismatic Leadership” theme from GDELT. To comprise the negative
attribute, we included themes “Corruption” and “Scandal.”2

188

Communication Research 47(2)

Time Series Analysis
GDELT GKG was downloaded in tab-separated values format. Python was used to
iterate over each row of data. When a news item was from a media source that was
identified in one of the media types defined above, the item was then inspected if it
mentioned one of the two candidates and if it matched any of the 19 issues or the two
affective attributes. Media and candidate/attribute counts were summed by day, and
treated as time series data. A time series analysis was performed to assess if IAS was
present. Granger causality models were considered for each candidate/attribute and
media type. Granger causality addresses auto-correlation (e.g., regressing past values
of the outcome variable) and time lags, two necessary components to address timeordered effects. F-tests were used as indicators of significance. Using the majority rule
(Vargo et al., 2018), an IAS relationship was considered to be significant for substantive attributes if at least 10 out of 19 issues studied here achieved significance in
Granger causality tests; and for affective attributes if both positive and negative attributes achieved significance.

A Fine-Grained Approach of IAS
To measure IAS effects at a story and event level (Harder et al., 2017; Welbers, 2016),
this article further analyzed specific news content. According to Welbers’ (2016) definition, a story should not be too abstract to represent a theme (i.e., a broad issue category) or too specific to represent an event (i.e., anything that happens). In addition, a
story should last for at least a few days to trace the interaction of coverage between
fake news websites and fact-based media. To select qualified stories for analysis, we
first reviewed studies about the 2016 election (e.g., Faris et al., 2017) and then
reviewed prominent news items from the fake news websites identified earlier. A total
of 2,047 articles about Trump and 1,919 articles about Clinton were found from the
fake news websites. In GDELT, each news item is represented as a URL, which can be
used to infer the news headlines (see the URL below for an example).
http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/09/02/clinton-foundationssweden-affiliate-bagged-6-million-from-undisclosed-donors
A frequency analysis was conducted to extract the most frequent words that were
used in the fake news headlines. The researchers manually reviewed all words that
occurred at least 10 times in each dataset (i.e., Trump- and Clinton-related news articles)
to explore prominent stories. In total, five stories about Trump were selected: (1) Trump’s
promise to build a border wall between the United States and Mexico; (2) Trump’s comments related to Ford’s shifting jobs to Mexico; (3) charges related to Trump’s sexual
assault of women; (4) the alleged case about Trump raping a teenage girl; and (5)
Trump’s birther accusation against Obama. And four stories about Clinton were selected:
(1) Clinton’s role in Benghazi; (2) Clinton’s health problems; (3) charges related to the
Clinton Foundation; and (4) Clinton’s speeches to Goldman Sachs.
To find matches of these specific stories, search logic was built in Python. The
headlines of news articles from both fake and fact-based media in GDELT were

Guo and Vargo

189

searched against for matches. Two researchers of the article worked iteratively on
refining search terms. In all, through four rounds of revisions, the intercoder reliability
between two researchers achieved an average of 0.99 (α) for all stories based on about
30% of the sample. An external validity check was conducted to compare human coding and the coding results generated from the search terms, reaching a 0.96 humancomputer agreement.
To examine whether and how fake news websites interacted with fact-based media,
we qualitatively reviewed all headlines of the identified stories—1,220 headlines
about Trump and 1,435 headlines about Clinton. For each story, all news articles from
fact-based media and fake media—satire and misinformation websites—that covered
the same specific events were thoroughly reviewed, and therefore the IAS was also
examined at the level of event. The headlines and news articles were repeatedly read
until salient and recurrent patterns emerged.

Results
Tables 1 and 2 summarized the results of attribute agenda-setting analysis. Overall, the
study showed that misinformation websites followed the agenda of all types of factbased media in covering Trump, while the interplay between misinformation websites
and fact-based media was largely limited as for the coverage of Clinton. On the contrary, the interaction between satire websites and fact-based media was largely limited.
Given that misinformation websites (RQ1-2, H1-3, and RQ5-6) and satire websites
(RQ3-4, H4-6, and RQ7-8) exhibited distinct IAS patterns, the results of each were
reported separately.

Attribute Agenda Setting Involving Misinformation Websites
In addressing RQ1a, results showed that misinformation websites Granger-caused the
agenda of fact-based media in reporting two issues about Trump. Reversely, fact-based
media predicted the agenda of misinformation websites in covering 17 out of 19 issues.
Based on the majority rule, fact-based media were more likely to influence the agenda
of misinformation websites in covering issues related to Trump than reversely.
With respect to the news related to Clinton (RQ1b), results showed that few significant interactions existed between misinformation websites and fact-based media.
Misinformation websites predicted the agenda of fact-based media in covering three
issues, while followed the latter’s agenda in covering only two issues.
In answering RQ2a-b, misinformation websites influenced the agenda of fact-based
media in both positive and negative coverage of Trump, while the reverse relationship
was only found in their positive coverage of the candidate. That is, for news about
Trump, misinformation websites were more likely to predict the affective agenda of
fact-based media than reversely. In reporting Clinton, misinformation websites
Granger-caused the agenda of fact-based media in their negative coverage. The reverse
relationship was not found.

190

Communication Research 47(2)

Table 1. Significant Granger Causality Tests Regarding News About Trump.
Relationship

Substantive attributes
(No. of issues)

From misinformation websites to other media
Misinformation → All fact-based
Misinformation → All online partisan
Misinformation → Conservative
Misinformation → Liberal
Misinformation → Elite
Misinformation → News agencies
Misinformation → Traditional
Misinformation → Emerging
From other media to misinformation websites
All fact-based → Misinformation
All online partisan → Misinformation
Conservative → Misinformation
Liberal → Misinformation
Elite → Misinformation
News agencies → Misinformation
Traditional → Misinformation
Emerging → Misinformation
From satire websites to other media
Satire → All fact-based
Satire → All online partisan
Satire → Conservative
Satire → Liberal
Satire → Elite
Satire → News agencies
Satire → Traditional
Satire → Emerging
From other media to satire websites
All fact-based → Satire
All online partisan → Satire
Conservative → Satire
Liberal → Satire
Elite → Satire
News agencies → Satire
Traditional → Satire
Emerging to Satire

2
5
9
9
11
9
4
1

Affective attributes
Positive (5.13*),
Negative (5.10*)
Negative (7.71**)
Negative (6.57*),
Positive (4.33*)
Negative (12.20**)
n/a
n/a
Negative (4.43*)
Negative (7.70**)

17
15
12
13
13
10
16
17

Positive (6.83*)
Negative (4.05*)
n/a
Negative (5.67*)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Positive (11.75**),
Negative (5.30*)

1
n/a
n/a
n/a
2
1
1
1

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

n/a
1
1
1
n/a
1
n/a
n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

Note. The Granger causality parameter tests reported are based on F distribution for significance. Full
Granger causality model diagnostics are available from the authors upon request.
*p < .05. **p < .01.

191

Guo and Vargo
Table 2. Significant Granger Causality Tests Regarding News About Clinton.
Relationship
From misinformation websites to other media
Misinformation → All fact-based
Misinformation → All online partisan
Misinformation → Conservative
Misinformation → Liberal
Misinformation → Elite
Misinformation → News agencies
Misinformation → Traditional
Misinformation → Emerging
From other media to misinformation websites
All fact-based → Misinformation
All online partisan → Misinformation
Conservative → Misinformation
Liberal → Misinformation
Elite → Misinformation
News agencies → Misinformation
Traditional → Misinformation
Emerging → Misinformation
From satire websites to other media
Satire → All fact-based
Satire → All online partisan
Satire → Conservative
Satire → Liberal
Satire → Elite
Satire News agencies
Satire → Traditional
Satire → Emerging
From other media to satire websites
All fact-based → Satire
All online partisan → Satire
Conservative → Satire
Liberal → Satire
Elite → Satire
News agencies → Satire
Traditional → Satire
Emerging → Satire

Substantive attributes
(No. of issues)

Affective attributes

3
5
8
2
5
2
3
3

Negative (5.65*)
Negative (13.79**)
Negative (13.00**)
Negative (12.56**)
Negative (5.51*)
Negative (5.93**)
Negative (4.67*)
Negative (5.57*)

2
5
5
2
1
1
1
2

n/a
Negative (6.00*)
Negative (8.03**)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Negative (5.35*)

1
n/a
1
1
n/a
1
n/a
1

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

3
n/a
n/a
3
2
3
4
3

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

Note. The Granger causality parameter tests reported are based on F distribution for significance. Full
Granger causality model diagnostics are available from the authors upon request.
*p < 0.05. **p < .01.

192

Communication Research 47(2)

H1a-b expected that misinformation websites would have a reciprocal relationship
with partisan media as they covered the two candidates’ substantive attributes. For
news about Trump, it appeared that misinformation websites predicted the agenda of
partisan media in covering five issues. Reversely, partisan media predicted the agenda
of misinformation websites in covering 15 out of 19 issues. That is, partisan media
were more likely to influence the agenda of misinformation websites in covering
issues about Trump than reversely. H1a was partially supported.
When it came to the media portrayal of Clinton, misinformation websites set the
agenda of partisan media in terms of five issues. Reversely, partisan media also
Granger-caused the agenda of misinformation websites in covering five issues. Given
the limited interactions in both directions, H1b was rejected.
In addressing H2a-b, results showed that misinformation websites and partisan
media influenced each other in their negative coverage of both Trump and Clinton,
while significance was not found for positive attributes. H2a-b were not supported.
H3a-b predicted that misinformation websites would have a greater reciprocal relationship with partisan than nonpartisan media. In covering Trump, while misinformation websites influenced partisan media in covering five issues, their agenda
Granger-caused the agenda of elite media (11 issues), news agencies (nine issues),
traditional media (four issues), and emerging media (one issue). Reversely, partisan
media Granger-caused the agenda of misinformation websites in covering 15 issues
about Trump. To compare, emerging media predicted the agenda of misinformation
websites in covering 17 issues, traditional media predicted 16 issues, elite media predicted 13 issues, and news agencies predicted 10 issues. In terms of affective coverage, misinformation websites not only influenced partisan media in their negative
coverage of Trump but also set the agenda of emerging media and traditional media in
the same way. On the contrary, while partisan media influenced misinformation websites in their negative coverage of Trump, emerging media were found to Grangercause the agenda of misinformation websites in both positive and negative coverage of
the candidate. Taken together, the results showed that, for Trump’s coverage, misinformation responded to the agenda of all types of fact-based media, including partisan
media. H3a was not supported.
With respect to the news coverage of Clinton, misinformation websites set the
agenda of partisan media in covering five issues; they also Granger-caused the agenda
of elite media (five issues), traditional media (three issues), emerging media (three
issues), and news agencies (two issues). As for the reverse relationship, while partisan
media predicted the agenda of misinformation websites in terms of five issues, emerging media predicted three issues, and other types of fact-based media predicted one
issue. In covering affective attributes about Clinton, misinformation websites were
able to predict the agenda of all types of fact-based media in their negative coverage
of the candidate. Reversely, both partisan and emerging media influenced the agenda
of misinformation websites in reporting Clinton negatively. In general, the degree of
interaction between misinformation websites and all types of fact-based media was at
best moderate in covering Clinton. H3b was not supported.

Guo and Vargo

193

RQ5a-b and RQ6a-b asked about the interplay between misinformation websites
and partisan media of different political orientations. Results showed that the coverage
of Trump in misinformation websites Granger-caused the agenda of both conservative
and liberal media in terms of nine issues. Reversely, conservative media predicted the
agenda of misinformation websites in covering 12 issues, and liberal media predicted
13 issues. Using our threshold to determine significance, it appeared that misinformation websites did not significantly predict the agenda of either conservative or liberal
media; instead, partisan media of both directions significantly influenced misinformation websites in covering issues related to Trump.
The affective coverage of Trump showed a different pattern. Misinformation websites were found to influence conservative media in both positive and negative coverage of Trump, while influencing liberal media only in their negative coverage of the
candidate. Reversely, liberal media’s negative coverage of Trump predicted the agenda
of misinformation websites, whereas conservative media did not influence misinformation websites affectively.
With respect to Clinton, misinformation websites predicted the agenda of conservative media in covering eight issues, whereas they predicted liberal media in terms of
only two issues. Reversely, conservative media influenced misinformation websites in
reporting five issues, and liberal media predicted two issues. In addition, misinformation websites Granger-caused the agenda of both conservative and liberal media in
their negative coverage of Clinton. A significant reverse relationship was only found
from conservative media to misinformation websites. While no significance was
achieved using our majority rule, the results did seem to show that misinformation
websites slightly better predicted the agenda of conservative-oriented websites than
liberal-oriented websites in covering substantive attributes of Clinton.

Attribute Agenda Setting Involving Satire Websites
Unlike misinformation websites, satire websites appeared to barely interact with different types of fact-based media. For Trump, satire websites had only a few interplays
with some fact-based media in covering party politics, racism, and taxes. A greater
level of IAS was found between satire websites and fact-based media in covering
Clinton. However, none of the relationships achieved significance.

Story and Event-Level IAS Analysis
Turning to the IAS analysis at the story and event level, our study showed that media
of different types did follow each other in reporting the nine stories selected for the
analysis.
Specifically, several salient patterns of IAS at the story and event level have
emerged. First, the analysis showed that misinformation websites often borrowed
ideas of news events from fact-based media. In many cases, misinformation websites
just repeated the reporting without distorting the original content because the content
was sensational already. For example, on October 7, 2016, The Washington Post

194

Communication Research 47(2)

published an article of Trump’s “locker room talk,” which caused a lot of media outlets
to follow the coverage. Breitbart reported the event on the same day; another two
misinformation websites—one left wing (Addicting Info) and one right wing (Red
State)—repeated the reporting on October 8. On October 12, The New York Times
published a follow-up story that two women accused Trump of touching them inappropriately. Again, misinformation websites just operated like other media to repeat
the Times coverage. This agenda-setting impact was not restricted to elite media. On
September 13, a journalist from Intercept (a liberal media outlet) reported on Twitter
that a leaked email showed Colin Powell discussed Clinton’s health issue back in
2015. The event attracted a lot of media attention including misinformation websites
such as Prison Planet and fact-based media, emerging and traditional, such as The
Washington Times. In other words, this lead-and-follow pattern was not unique to misinformation websites. Whenever a fact-based media outlet broke a scandal-like event
about either candidate, all kinds of media were likely to follow.
Second, for stories and events that were less sensational, fake news websites including satire and misinformation websites often altered the existing news from fact-based
media by adding unverified or sensational content or by framing the news in a biased
way. Consider the story of Trump’s promise to build a border wall between the United
States and Mexico as an example. After Trump met with Mexican President Enrique
Pena Nieto on September 1, he tweeted that Mexico would pay for the wall and Nieto
refuted the claim. Many fact-based media reported this event and therefore so did fake
news websites. On the same day, Addicting Info reported the event with a sensational
title: “Mexico president confirms Trump lied he told him to go f*** himself and his
wall.” Based on the story, Breitbart reported a similar news event with suspicious
content: “Trump declares war: Mexican cartel assets pay border wall.” Two days later,
the satire website News Biscuit parodied the news and “reported”: “Mexico wall ‘will
be trained in martial arts’ warns Trump.”
The pattern also applied to news about Clinton. On September 19, Bill Clinton
spoke in a National Public Radio (NPR) interview to address the public’s concerns
about the Clinton Foundation. The NPR title reads, “Bill Clinton: ‘It’s hard’ to think
about leaving foundation.’” During the interview Clinton said, among many other
things
. . . It was natural for people who’ve been our political allies and personal friends to call
and ask for things. And I trusted the State Department wouldn’t do anything they
shouldn’t do . . .

Based on the NPR interview, Cable News Network (CNN) reported the event with a
sensational headline, “Bill Clinton: ‘Natural’ for foundation donors to seek favors.”
Many traditional and emerging media outlets repeated CNN’s headline and coverage.
Breitbart reported the same event with an even more misleading title, “Bill Clinton
admits donors gave to Clinton Foundation for favors.”
Third, while misinformation websites often stole content from fact-based media,
they did sometimes produce “original content,” which were mostly follow-ups based

Guo and Vargo

195

on events reported by fact-based media. Most of the time, such coverage attracted little
attention, solely from other misinformation websites. Fact-based media did not address
these types of fake news follow-up stories. For example, on October 15, Wikileaks
released the transcripts of Clinton’s paid speech at Goldman Sachs. Media outlets of
different kinds reported the event from different angles. Each focused on a part of the
speech and published an article. IAS took place among various fact-based media outlets. Likewise, Breitbart also published articles about the speech. One of them was
repeated in Prison Planet, while the rest did not garner any media attention. This pattern is more obvious when comparing fact-based media and misinformation websites
in covering similar events. On November 4, following Russian Today’s article, a few
misinformation websites such as 21st Century Wire reported that the Clinton
Foundation took money from Qatar despite the fact that they knew the country supported ISIS. The coverage did not attract much attention from fact-based media. By
contrast, when Reuters reported on the same day that the Clinton Foundation confirmed they took money from Qatar without reporting it to the State Department, it did
cause many other media to repeat the coverage.
Finally, in rare cases, fact-based media—mostly partisan media—did repeat fake
news articles with unverified or biased content. The aforementioned Breitbart story
about Mexican cartel paying for the wall was repeated in one conservative media outlet (investmentwatchblog.com) and one emerging media outlet (inquistr.com) on the
next day. Likewise, in light of Trump’s comments related to Ford’s shifting jobs to
Mexico, Red State published a follow-up story: “Marita Noon: Blame for Ford’s
Mexico move falls on Obama administration.” Breitbart and two conservative media
outlets American Spectator and Investor repeated the reporting.

Discussion and Conclusion
Based on the 2016 U.S. presidential election, the study examined how fake news
affected the emerging media ecosystem through an integrated IAS analysis. The results
showed that websites that spread misinformation had a fairly close IAS relationship
with fact-based media in covering Trump, but not for the news about Clinton. On the
contrary, satire websites barely interacted with the agenda of other media outlets. A
qualitative analysis further showed that, rather than playing a unique agenda-setting
role in this emerging media landscape, fake news websites added some noise to an
already sensationalized news environment. Specific findings of the study and its theoretical contributions are discussed below.
Our study showed a pattern slightly different from previous research. Vargo et al.
(2018) found that in some cases, from 2014 to 2016, fake news could influence the
broad issue agendas of partisan media and emerging media. Our analysis examined the
news coverage of two political candidates, respectively, during the 2016 election. In
addition, the current study distinguished between misinformation and satire websites,
and analyzed IAS with a more granular topical focus. By “zooming in” in these ways,
our data here show that significant IAS took place in covering Trump but not Clinton.
Allcott and Gentzkow (2017) found that fake news was widely shared and heavily

196

Communication Research 47(2)

tilted in favor of Trump on social media. Our study adds to the literature by demonstrating that the news coverage of Trump—a controversial politician—led to the interaction between misinformation websites and fact-based media during the election.
Specifically, misinformation websites followed the issue agenda of all types of factbased media in covering Trump. Reversely, the impact of misinformation websites on
fact-based media was relatively smaller, but the results showed misinformation websites
influenced the affective agenda of fact-based media in reporting Trump. A qualitative
analysis confirmed that in most cases misinformation websites borrowed ideas from
fact-based media rather than reversely. There were occasions where fact-based media
reported on specific stories or events that stemmed from misinformation websites.
Luckily, these results were few and far between. These findings should, to some extent,
allay concerns around the integrity of professional media organizations, which were not
lured into using content from fake news websites to attract audience attention.
However, it is important to note that the influence of misinformation on real news is
present in that it may set the tone of news coverage for certain political candidates in
fact-based media. Here we contribute to the literature by providing a different lens in
which to assess the impact of fake news. Previous research showed that an average U.S.
adult might have seen one or several fake news stories in the months before election
(Allcott & Gentzkow, 2017) and that 75% of U.S. adults who were familiar with a fake
news headline viewed the story as accurate (Silverman & Singer-Vine, 2016). Our
study further reveals that direct exposure and persuasion aside, people may be influenced by fake news indirectly through consuming fact-based media. In addition, the
finding that this influence occurred at the affective level is particularly concerning.
Scholars have posited that affective framing of political candidates in news has a significant impact on voters’ attitudes toward candidates (Coleman & Wu, 2010).
The finding that misinformation websites closely followed the agenda of fact-based
media is also concerning. Different from what we expected, misinformation websites
responded to all types of news media, partisan media included. As the qualitative analysis showed, these misinformation websites repurposed or altered existing news content
to intentionally mislead their readers. What is more notable is that they often times
repeated the coverage due to the fact that the story was sensational. Like other media
outlets, fake news websites—particularly misinformation websites—paid special attention to scandal-driven stories about the two candidates. Dramatic political events occupied front pages of not only partisan media but also mainstream media outlets such as
The New York Times and The Washington Post, which all received boosts in subscriptions and page views since the election. Taken together, the results seem to suggest that
the current media and political environment provides a fertile breeding ground for fake
news. Fake news websites appear to feed off of the sensational, and there was no lack
of such stories during this election in the fact-based media. These conditions appear to
have blurred the boundary between real and fake news given their mutual interest during this election. Perhaps, the real concern is not necessarily the growth of fake news
websites, but rather how accurately and objectively “real news” depicts the political
landscape in the United States. Our study suggests that journalists of legitimate news
organizations may not want to continue to discuss the impact of “fake news”—which

Guo and Vargo

197

itself can be a sensational topic, but rather reflect on their own practices of reporting
news, which may be a more critical problem of American journalism.
It is also worth noting that the distinction between two types of fake news—misinformation and satire—is important because only the former seemed to demonstrate an
IAS relationship with fact-based media. While news satire may also mislead users
(Emery, 2018), the genre is mainly to entertain and perhaps even serve the function of
the “Fifth Estate” (Berkowitz & Schwartz, 2016). Our finding pointed out that, unfortunately, it is those that intentionally tend to mislead that exhibit impact on the emerging media landscape.
In addition to shedding light on the role fake news websites played in a recent election, this study also contributes to IAS theory by employing an integrated analytical
framework. While attribute agenda-setting analysis demonstrated the extent to which
news reporters looked to their peers to validate the sense of news, a fine-grained analysis at the story and event level revealed whether media outlets borrowed story ideas
from each other. This comprehensive analysis not only methodologically enriches IAS
analysis but also helps understand the interplay between fake news websites and other
media at different conceptual levels. We recommend future research should also adopt
an approach that examines IAS at different granularity to obtain a more comprehensive picture of the increasingly complex media ecosystem.
Despite its contributions, the study is limited. When analyzing IAS at the story and
event level, a Granger causality test was not available due to the lack of data points in
our sample. Thus, the results showed nuances through a qualitative analysis but not a
systematic pattern. Second, our statistical analysis arbitrarily chose time lag as a day
because of the constraint of the GDELT dataset, whereas IAS could happen within
several hours (Harder et al., 2017). Future research should explore more sophisticated
ways to collect, archive, and analyze large-scaled news media data. Third, our analysis
focused on the interaction between fake news and fact-based media organizations
without controlling for the effect of other information sources such as political tweets
or public relations efforts (Parmelee, 2014). During the 2016 campaign, Twitter
became a battleground for both Trump and Clinton to fight for their votes. Political
tweets might directly influence the media agenda, both fake and fact-based. Future
research should consider these external variables in IAS analysis.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Notes
1.

Two elite media studied are websites of The New York Times and The Washington Post.
Other traditional media are websites of other newspapers, television, or radio (e.g., latimes.

198

2.

Communication Research 47(2)
com). Two news agencies are The Associated Press and United Press International. Onlineonly, partisan media include conservative- (e.g., cnsnews.com) and liberal-oriented websites (e.g., huffingtonpost.com). Emerging media refer to online-only, nonpartisan media
(e.g., yahoo.com).
Themes in GDELT refer to a wide range of things from major issues to evaluative personal
attributes. To establish a theme, a computer system developed for the GDELT project is
trained to recognize keywords in text that are associated with that theme. Two human
coders reviewed the themes and combined attribute categories, reaching an intercoder reliability of .84 (α).

References
Albright, J. (2016, November). The #Election2016 micro-propaganda machine. Medium.
Retrieved from https://medium.com/@d1gi/the-election2016-micro-propaganda-machine383449cc1fba
Allcott, H., & Gentzkow, M. (2017). Social media and fake news in the 2016 election. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31, 211-236. doi:10.1257/jep.31.2.211
Bakir, V., & McStay, A. (2018). Fake news and the economy of emotions: Problems, causes,
solutions. Digital Journalism, 6, 154-175. doi:10.1080/21670811.2017.1345645
Baum, M. A., & Groeling, T. (2008). New media and the polarization of American political
discourse. Political Communication, 25, 345-365. doi:10.1080/10584600802426965
Berkowitz, D., & Schwartz, D. A. (2016). Miley, CNN and The Onion: When fake news
becomes realer than real. Journalism Practice, 10, 1-17. doi:10.1080/17512786.2015.10
06933
Coleman, R., & Wu, H. D. (2010). Proposing emotion as a dimension of affective agenda setting: Separating affect into two components and comparing their second-level effects.
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 87, 315-327.
Denham, B. E. (2014). Intermedia attribute agenda setting in the New York Times: The case of
animal abuse in US horse racing. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 91, 17-37.
doi:10.1177/1077699013514415
Emery, D. (2018, January 18). Don’t be fooled! A guide to fake news websites. ThoughtCo.
Retrieved from https://www.thoughtco.com/guide-to-fake-news-websites-3298824
Faris, R., Roberts, H., Etling, B., Bourassa, N., Zuckerman, E., & Benkler, Y. (2017).
Partisanship, propaganda, and disinformation: Online media and the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Retrieved from https://cyber.harvard.edu/publications/2017/08/mediacloud
Guess, A. W. (2016). Media choice and moderation: Evidence from online tracking data.
Retrieved from https://www.dropbox.com/s/uk005hhio3dysm8/GuessJMP.pdf?dl=0
Hammond, J., & Weidmann, N. B. (2014). Using machine-coded event data for the micro-level
study of political violence. Research & Politics, 1, 1-8. doi:10.1177/2053168014539924
Harder, R. A., Sevenans, J., & Van Aelst, P. (2017). Intermedia agenda setting in the social
media age: How traditional players dominate the news agenda in election times. The
International Journal of Press/Politics, 22, 275-293. doi:10.1177/1940161217704969
Iyengar, S., & Hahn, K. S. (2009). Red media, blue media: Evidence of ideological selectivity in
media use. Journal of Communication, 59, 19-39. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2008.01402.x
Kiousis, S., Bantimaroudis, P., & Ban, H. (1999). Candidate image attributes: Experiments on
the substantive dimension of second level agenda setting. Communication Research, 26,
414-428. doi:10.1177/009365099026004003
Kiousis, S., Popescu, C., & Mitrook, M. (2007). Understanding influence on corporate reputation: An examination of public relations efforts, media coverage, public opinion, and

Guo and Vargo

199

financial performance from an agenda-building and agenda-setting perspective. Journal of
Public Relations Research, 19, 147-165. doi:10.1080/10627260701290661
Leetaru, K. (2015). Mining libraries: Lessons learned from 20 years of massive computing on
the world’s information. Information Services & Use, 35, 31-50. doi:10.3233/ISU-150767
Lim, J. (2011). First-level and second-level intermedia agenda-setting among major news websites. Asian Journal of Communication, 21, 167-185. doi:10.1080/01292986.2010.539300
Linebarger, P. M. A. (1948). Psychological warfare. Washington, DC: Infantry Journal Press.
McCombs, M. (2004). Setting the agenda: The mass media and public opinion. Cambridge,
UK: Polity Press.
McCombs, M., Llamas, J. P., Lopez-Escobar, E., & Rey, F. (1997). Candidate images in
Spanish elections: Second-level agenda-setting effects. Journalism & Mass Communication
Quarterly, 74, 703-717. doi:10.1177/107769909707400404
Meraz, S. (2009). Is there an elite hold? Traditional media to social media agenda setting influence in blog networks. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 14, 682-707.
doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2009.01458.x
Meraz, S. (2011). Using time series analysis to measure intermedia agenda-setting influence
in traditional media and political blog networks. Journalism & Mass Communication
Quarterly, 88, 176-194. doi:10.1177/107769901108800110
Mihailidis, P., & Viotty, S. (2017). Spreadable spectacle in digital culture: Civic expression,
fake News, and the role of media literacies in “post-fact” society. American Behavioral
Scientist, 61, 441-454. doi:10.1177/0002764217701217
Parmelee, J. H. (2014). The agenda-building function of political tweets. New Media & Society,
16, 434-450. doi:10.1177/1461444813487955
Prior, M. (2013). Media and political polarization. Annual Review of Political Science, 16, 101127. doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-100711-135242
Reese, S. D., & Danielian, L. H. (1989). Intermedia influence and the drug issue: Converging
on cocaine. In P. Shoemaker (Ed.), Communication campaigns about drugs: Government,
media, and the public (pp. 29-46). New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rojecki, A., & Meraz, S. (2016). Rumors and factitious informational blends: The role of the web
in speculative politics. New Media & Society, 18, 25-43. doi:10.1177/1461444814535724
Shoemaker, P., & Reese, S. D. (2011). Mediating the message. New York, NY: Routledge.
Silverman, C., & Singer-Vine, J. (2016). Most Americans who see fake news believe it, new
survey says. BuzzFeed News. Retrieved from https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/
fake-news-survey?utm_term=.hjjx9yg12#.hcO5RNwoy
Southwell, B. G., Thorson, E. A., & Sheble, L. (Eds.). (2018). Misinformation and mass audiences. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Stroud, N. J. (2010). Polarization and partisan selective exposure. Journal of Communication,
60, 556-576. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2010.01497.x
Tandoc, E. C., Jr., Lim, Z. W., & Ling, R. (2018). Defining “Fake News”: A typology of scholarly definitions. Digital Journalism, 6, 137-153. doi:10.1080/21670811.2017.1360143
Townsend, T. (2016, November 21). The bizarre truth behind the biggest pro-Trump Facebook hoaxes.
Inc. Retrieved from https://www.inc.com/tess-townsend/ending-fed-trump-facebook.html
Tuchman, G. (1978). Making news: A study in the construction of reality. New York, NY: Free
Press.
Vargo, C., Guo, L., & Amazeen, M. A. (2018). The agenda-setting power of fake news: A big
data analysis of the online media landscape from 2014 to 2016. New Media & Society, 20,
2028-2049. doi:10.1177/1461444817712086

200

Communication Research 47(2)

Vargo, C. J., & Guo, L. (2017). Networks, Big Data, and Intermedia Agenda Setting: An
Analysis of Traditional, Partisan, and Emerging Online US News. Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly, 94, 1031-1055.
Vonbun, R., Königslöw, K. K., & Schoenbach, K. (2016). Intermedia agenda-setting in a multimedia news environment. Journalism, 17, 1054-1073. doi:10.1177/1464884915595475
Waisanen, D. J. (2011). Crafting hyperreal spaces for comic insights: The Onion News
Network’s ironic iconicity. Communication Quarterly, 59(5), 508-528.
Wardle, C. (2017). Fake news. It’s complicated. First Draft. Retrieved from https://firstdraftnews.org/fake-news-complicated/
Waschke, M. (2017). Misuse of computers. In Personal cybersecurity: How to avoid and
recover from cybercrime (pp. 103-123). Berkeley, CA: Apress.
Welbers, K. (2016). Gatekeeping in the digital Age. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam.
Zimdars, M. (2016, November 18). My “fake news list” went viral. But made-up stories are only
part of the problem. The Washington Post. Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.
com/posteverything/wp/2016/11/18/my-fake-news-list-went-viral-but-made-up-storiesare-only-part-of-the-problem/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.d19fa7c1f621
Zubiaga, A., Aker, A., Bontcheva, K., Liakata, M., & Procter, R. (2018). Detection and resolution of rumours in social media: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(2), 1-36.
doi:10.1145/3161603

Author Biographies
Lei Guo (PhD, University of Texas at Austin) is an assistant professor of emerging media
­studies in the College of Communication, Boston University. Her research focuses on the
­development of media effects theories, emerging media and democracy, and computational
social science methodologies.
Chris Vargo (PhD, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) is an assistant professor specializing in the application of analytics in mass communication at the University of Colorado
Boulder. He specializes in the use of computer science methods to investigate big data using
theories from the communication and political science disciplines. Research methods of specialization include text mining, machine learning, computer-assisted content analysis, data forecasting, information retrieval, and network analysis.

