1205893

research-article2023

NMS0010.1177/14614448231205893new media & societyPeng et al.

Article

The dark side of
entertainment? How viral
entertaining media build an
attention base for the far-right
politics of The Epoch Times

new media & society
﻿1­–22
© The Author(s) 2023
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448231205893
DOI: 10.1177/14614448231205893
journals.sagepub.com/home/nms

Yilang Peng

University of Georgia, USA

Tian Yang

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Kecheng Fang

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Abstract
To amplify their audience reach, far-right outlets need a calculated and coordinated
array of acts to set the stage for audience attention and to build a communication
network that spreads their messages. We examined the Facebook newsfeed history
of The Epoch Times (N = 117,274 posts from 2013 to 2020), which transitioned from a
niche anti-China publication to an influential player in US far-right politics. We found
that US partisan issues helped the outlet attract immediate audience engagement, but
such content did not invite audience growth and engagement with future content. In
contrast, viral entertaining videos, while seemingly benign and mundane, demonstrated
superb effects in getting audience responses, accumulating followers, and boosting
engagement with subsequent posts. We argue that entertainment media is a crucial
component of the extreme politics landscape that directs the flows of political attention,
which could exert a “ripple effect” on assembling audience networks.
Keywords
Audience building, entertainment, far-right, The Epoch Times
Corresponding author:
Kecheng Fang, New Asia College, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Room 203, Humanities Building,
Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong.
Email: kfang@cuhk.edu.hk

2

new media & society 00(0)

The contemporary political communication landscape on social media is characterized
by intense competition for audience attention among a wide range of actors. In the farright media sphere, many actors blend extreme partisan politics with the dissemination
of misinformation and half-truths (Bauer et al., 2022; Benkler et al., 2018), which pose
significant threats to social cohesion and democratic health. The pursuit of audience
attention by malicious political actors is a topic that has been researched for a long time
(Bittman, 1985). Social media provide political actors with avenues to reach a wider
audience, directly interact with followers, and create a communication network that
spreads their ideas through connected supporters. However this potential is mitigated by
the high competition for attention and the short attention span of users on social media.
Consequently, researchers have examined how these actors, including far-right outlets
and disinformation sources, leverage social media to amplify their audience reach, frequently through a calculated and coordinated array of acts to set the stage for audience
attention and to build an infrastructural network that facilitates the spread of their messages (Bechmann, 2020; Dawson and Innes, 2019; Zhang et al., 2021). Prior research has
exposed a variety of tactics adopted by various actors, such as the Russian Internet
Research Agency (IRA), to maintain audience growth and attention on Twitter (Dawson
and Innes, 2019; Doroshenko and Lukito, 2021; Zhang et al., 2021).
This study argues that entertainment media, such as feel-good videos, life hacks, and
cute animal posts, are a less examined yet crucial component of the extreme politics landscape that directs the flows of political attention. Far-right media, typically positioned at
the fringes of the established center-right and right-wing outlets, are alternative media
outlets that oppose mainstream media and establishment politics while promoting farright ideologies such as authoritarianism, xenophobia, and racism (Heft et al., 2020).
Conventional wisdom might claim that far-right outlets concentrate on hyper-partisan and
extreme politics to amass a large audience. However, political news only comprises a
small percentage of people’s news diets, whereas non-political topics, such as entertainment and sports, still dominate people’s attention (Mukerjee et al., 2022; Wojcieszak
et al., 2023). Also, only a small percentage of social media users are highly engaged with
politics, let alone far-right politics (Grinberg et al., 2019; Guess et al., 2019a). A small
segment of highly active users accounts for the majority of engagement with fake news
sources or radical partisan content (Grinberg et al., 2019; Guess et al., 2019b; Hosseinmardi
et al., 2021). In addition, scholars have observed that far-right politics increasingly incorporates humor and entertainment, as seen in the use of political memes on social media
(Trillò and Shifman, 2021). Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate how effectively various
content strategies adopted by political actors attract audience attention on social media
platforms where a majority of users may not be highly interested in politics.
Our study focuses on how media messages can be used to build an audience base and
accumulate audience attention, as attention is often the first step in political persuasion or
radicalization. Given the importance of assembling a communication network in circulating political messages, we argue that there are two distinct forms of attention-building
effects: media messages can have immediate effects of attracting audience attention and
engagement right after they get published; they can also exert ripple effects that spread to
audience growth and attract more audience engagement with future content. Extreme and
incendiary political content may appeal to a subset of social media users highly engaged

Peng et al.

3

Figure 1. Follower growth of four far-right outlets’ Facebook pages from July 2017 to
November 2021.
Note. A higher positive bias score indicated more bias toward the right.

with politics, but whether such messages sustain follower growth remains unclear. On the
contrary, while entertaining media seems benign and irrelevant to the circulation of political information, such content may resonate with a wider audience and build a communication network that could be repurposed for future communication attempts.
In summary, we aim to expand current far-right research in two ways: we incorporate
entertainment media in studying far-right politics and consider both the immediate and
ripple effects of attention-building strategies. We apply this expanded framework to a
thorough examination of The Epoch Times’ Facebook newsfeed. Similar to other actors
in conservative politics, this outlet blends disinformation and far-right politics and serves
as a prominent example showing how a small, low-budget publication can effectively
utilize the logic of social media and make its way to the center stage of US far-right politics, quadrupling its revenue from 2016 to 2019 (Alba, 2021; Markay, 2021). Appealing
to avid supporters of Donald Trump, some of whom are far-right,1 it championed the
dissemination of pro-Trump conspiracy theories, such as the Spygate theory, which
falsely claimed that the Obama administration planted a spy in his 2016 presidential
campaign, and the allegation about widespread fraud in the 2020 US presidential election
(Atkinson et al., 2021; Collins, 2019; Wilson, 2021). Importantly, The Epoch Times
depends crucially on social media activities for audience expansion, has heavily invested
in Facebook advertising, and adopted a broad range of content strategies to compete for
audience attention (Alba, 2021; Collins, 2019; Roose, 2020). By November 2021, it had
accumulated 9.1 million followers on Facebook, outnumbering Breitbart and Newsmax
in the far-right playing field (Figure 1). By investigating the growth trajectory of The
Epoch Times on Facebook, our research reveals the immediate and ripple effects of different content strategies, including both hyper-partisan politics and entertainment media,
on accumulating audience attention.

4

new media & society 00(0)

Grabbing attention in the current political communication
environment
Attention is one of the most important resources in political communication, as it
increases the visibility and exposure of certain actors, institutions, or ideas, and could
potentially lead to political persuasion and mobilization. However, political communication in the social media era is characterized by information abundance and the scarcity of
attention (Klinger and Svensson, 2015; Stroud, 2017). On social media, where multiple
actors interact with each other and share news and information, not only news organizations but also social media users together shape the attention given to various information items (Thorson and Wells, 2016). The ability to draw attention is further rewarded
by algorithms and ranking systems in social media platforms through the amplification
of popular content (Bucher, 2018; Klinger and Svensson, 2018).
Previous research has identified several ways for political actors to direct and manipulate attention in this environment. The first set of strategies focuses on interaction and
involvement with other actors in the network. For example, actors like politicians and
partisan media could employ bots (i.e. automated social media accounts) to promulgate
certain messages and increase their perceived popularity, which in turn attract more
attention (Dawson and Innes, 2019; Woolley and Howard, 2018). Also, IRA Twitter
accounts adopted a strategy called “follow fishing,” for example, following and unfollowing a large number of other accounts regularly, so some accounts will follow them
back (Dawson and Innes, 2019). The most successful imposter Twitter accounts operated
by the IRA boosted their following largely through deliberate engagement with partisan
Twitter networks in the United States, suggesting a network strategy of grabbing attention (Zhang et al., 2021). Meanwhile, particularly for extreme political actors such as
alt-right and far-right, scholars have documented multiple strategies to attract audiences,
including deploying cloaked websites (the hard-to-detect authorship accompanied with
concealed agendas to attract users, see Daniels, 2009) and mobilizing followers to contribute content (Marwick and Lewis, 2017).
Another strategy political actors can adopt to maximize audience attention is to carefully choose what content to publish. Broadly, there seem to be two visions of the current
political communication landscape on social media. First, we may think of political communication on social media as a political battleground, where individuals and groups
with different political views engage in fierce competition to capture attention and
engage followers with messages that are often incendiary, divisive, or radical. Indeed,
social media posts that provoke moral outrage or attack political opponents are more
likely to be shared (Brady et al., 2021; Rathje et al., 2021). Comments that are more toxic
and uncivil also harvest more likes on Facebook (Kim et al., 2021). Such an environment
seemingly provides fertile ground for far-right actors to propagate highly partisan content with lies, attacks, and sensational stories. Indeed, previous studies have found that
they leverage affective communication practices, such as portraying minority groups as
threats (Deem, 2019).
Nevertheless, such a depiction might not apply to most social media users. An alternative vision is that despite a highly visible and vocal segment of ardent partisans, most
online users are not highly interested in politics. In one study, 1.69% of participants’ web

Peng et al.

5

visits were to news domains and only about half of them to political news articles
(Wojcieszak et al., 2023). On Facebook, 5% of posts shared by social media users are
related to politics (Guess et al., 2019a). Furthermore, while overall political topics are
not popular, ideologically slanted or factually misleading political content might only be
consumed by a small subset of users. Over half of web visits to news domains are to sites
that often promote themselves as centrist and attract audiences from both liberal and
conservative backgrounds, rather than to partisan sites appealing to one partisan camp
(Wojcieszak et al., 2023). Across Twitter (Grinberg et al., 2019), Facebook (Guess et al.,
2019b), and YouTube (Hosseinmardi et al., 2021), news consumption is concentrated on
mainstream sources, which typically have large readership and are frequently visited by
Americans, and mostly centrist sources, whereas only a small set of users account for the
majority of engagement with fake news, hyper-partisan, or radical sources.
In this research, we pay attention to how one successful actor, The Epoch Times, accumulates attention on Facebook. In response to these two contrasting visions of the political communication environments on social media, we believe that a far-right actor may
need to design a variety of content strategies to cater to social media users with different
levels of political involvement and ideological commitment. Next, we review two content logics that resonate with these visions.

The political logic: far-right content as an attention driver
Regarding the discussion on political logic, previous studies have found that political
posts containing strong emotions, such as fear and anger against outgroups, as well as
pride and hope toward far-right parties and politicians (Rathje et al., 2021; Wodak, 2020),
and those proactively using disinformation and conspiracy theories (Lazer et al., 2018),
tend to attract more traffic and engagement.
Far-right political content, referring to the content that shows strident nationalism,
fascism, racism, anti-immigration, anti-LGBTQ, and rejection of other minority groups
(Weimann and Masri, 2023), is also a salient strategy for audience engagement. More
specifically, in the recent US context, far-right is associated with the support for Donald
Trump and some other members in the Republican Party. The extremist posts that promote such ideology and endorse those politicians often get more likes and shares on
social media platforms (Scrivens and Amarasingam, 2020; Stier et al., 2017) and have
been growing across the globe (Thobani, 2019; Yang and Fang, 2023). Notably, far-right
media outlets are usually positioned as alternative media, which appeal to widespread
distrust in mainstream media and establishment politics among the public. Alternative
media create the perception that what they promote is treated unfairly by the mainstream
media (Haller et al., 2019). By presenting themselves as victims of the mainstream media
and as activists pushing for change through confrontation, alt-right media gains authority
among their followers (Figenschou and Ihlebæk, 2019).
Our case—The Epoch Times—is an important example of far-right media outlets
using far-right political content to attract attention. Based in New York City, the outlet
was founded by and affiliated with Falun Gong, the religious movement outlawed by the
Chinese government in the late 1990s. As Falun Gong’s founder Li Hongzhi and its
organizations were exiled to the United States, they set up their own media outlets to

6

new media & society 00(0)

propagate their ideas. Initially, they focused on Chinese-language publications, targeting
the Chinese diaspora. In recent years, they expanded their English-language operations
and joined the group of international far-right media outlets. Despite its origins, The
Epoch Times has become an international media organization that operates in multiple
countries and its English version, which our study focuses on, has evolved into an
American right-wing outlet similar to Breitbart and Newsmax (Zhang and Davis, 2022).
It not only attracts a large number of followers on social media, but also receives approval
from Trump’s inner circle (Roose, 2020; van Zuylen-Wood, 2021).
Using indexes from Ad Fontes,2 we can see from Figure 1 that The Epoch Times is classified as a typical far-right news outlet. Like Breitbart and other US-based far-right publications, The Epoch Times takes a firm stance against the Democrats and disseminates
conservative views through sensational and even fabricated information (Lewis, 2019;
Wilson, 2021). It should be noted that The Epoch Times covers a range of issues and may
be a reliable information provider on some issues, while disseminating fake news and conspiracy theories on others. Previous analyses reveal that the topics of its coverage include
US politics from the far-right perspective (Markay, 2021; Roose, 2020), China issues that
are motivated by its historical roots as a dissident group (Ownby, 2008), local issues in
New York where it is based, sensational reporting on crimes, among others. In this study,
we concentrate on two kinds of political content: US politics and China issues. It is expected
that it would take a similar approach to other far-right publications by highlighting controversial topics in US politics, such as immigration, to boost engagement.
It is worth noting that Falun Gong positions itself as an alternative voice that “clarifies
the truth” (jiang zhenxiang), fighting against not only Western mainstream media (Lewis,
2019; Lu et al., 2018), but also the repressive Chinese state (Ownby, 2008; Zhao, 2003)
through media activism. This ideology of anti-communism squares well with the farright community (Ilkowski, 2021). Against the background of intensifying US–China
conflicts and Trump’s anti-China rhetoric, it is expected that posts about China would be
attractive to US conservatives. The unique position of The Epoch Times as a victim of the
Chinese government potentially makes it more appealing to its target audience.
After discussing the two central types of political content, we turn to the discussion of
non-political content.

The entertainment logic: capturing clicks with non-political
content
In addition to publishing far-right political content, political actors also use entertainment media to get people’s attention. For example, Khan (2017) found that the relaxing
entertainment motive was the strongest predictor for both viewing and liking/disliking
videos. For political posts, those with entertaining styles are often more popular than
other types (e.g. Hussain, 2012). Notably, the use of sarcastic and humorous memes such
as Pepe the Frog is central to far-right communities, as memes can be an effective tool
for expressing support for controversial or taboo ideas, boosting user engagement, and
creating a strong sense of in-group culture (Moreno-Almeida and Gerbaudo, 2021; Trillò
and Shifman, 2021). Memes are used to “work as ‘gateway drugs’ to the more extreme
elements of alt-right ideology” (Marwick and Lewis, 2017: 36).

Peng et al.

7

Another area of research on entertainment and politics has examined political entertainment media, which has an entertainment function providing enjoyment or appreciation (Weinmann and Vorderer, 2018) and also contains political information, such as
political entertainment talk shows (Boukes, 2019; Roth et al., 2014) and political comedy
(Tsfati et al., 2009). Previous studies have uncovered the antecedents (e.g. Hmielowski
et al., 2011) and effects (e.g. Knobloch-Westerwick et al., 2021) of consuming political
entertainment media. These studies largely focus on how the information carried by the
entertainment media directly exerted political effects on consumers, such as political
persuasion (Knobloch-Westerwick et al., 2021), political interest (Roth et al., 2014), and
political trust (Tsfati et al., 2009).
In summary, entertainment media can be blended into political content and function
as a gateway to political information carried by entertainment content, such as political
memes and political talk shows. Complementing existing scholarship, this study argues
that entertainment media, even irrelevant to politics, can create ripple effects by increasing audience growth and therefore engagement with future content from the source,
thus directing audience attention to politics. Considering that entertainment content can
increase user engagement and attract more followers on social media, it is a likely strategy for media outlets to capture more clicks, including politically oriented outlets.
Previous research has shown that Chinese propaganda outlets use non-political content,
such as health tips, travel advisories, and entertainment content, to gain attention and
build a large audience base (Lu and Pan, 2021; Repnikova and Fang, 2018). Journalists
investigating the rise of The Epoch Times also found that it “employed a novel strategy
that involved creating dozens of Facebook pages, filling them with feel-good videos
and viral clickbait, and using them to sell subscriptions and drive traffic back to its partisan news coverage” (Roose, 2020).
We empirically examine whether the strategy of using non-political entertainment
content works for promoting The Epoch Times’ far-right agenda, focusing particularly
on viral entertaining videos provided by a group of viral video licensing companies,
such as Jukin Media and Viral Hog. In prior research, virality typically refers to the
rapid dissemination of an information item by a large number of individuals in a short
period, often beyond their original networks, resulting in a substantial increase in the
number of people exposed to the message (Nahon and Hemsley, 2013). We adopt the
term “viral” video as conventionally used in the industry, emphasizing their viral
potential rather than actual reach. These videos adopt certain styles, themes, and production strategies that mimic existing viral videos and have the potential to go viral
on social media, but their actual effects of attracting attention and engagement for The
Epoch Times needs further investigation. These companies’ business model is as follows: first, they discover user-generated videos that could go viral. Then, they strike
a revenue share with their owners. Next, they provide the videos, for a fee ranging
from $50 to $5,000, to media outlets and social media accounts seeking to expand
their audience bases and amplify their influence. Academic studies on this kind of
viral video and licensing companies are scarce, but media articles have revealed that
companies in this industry have become crucial distributors of viral content, and a
wide range of media outlets have used their services to boost engagement and gain
followers (Keiles, 2016; Koerber, 2018).

8

new media & society 00(0)

Summarizing the previous two sections, we propose the following hypothesis about
the effect of the three types of content that are expected to enjoy high levels of audience
engagement:
H1. Posts about (a) US politics, (b) China, and (c) viral entertaining videos are associated with higher audience engagement than posts about other topics.

Immediate and ripple effects of attention-building
strategies
In addition to juxtaposing two content logics of accumulating political attention, we also
distinguish between the immediate and ripple effects of content strategies. By immediate
effects, we mean that a media message can attract audience attention and engagement
after it gets published. This attention is typically limited to the particular piece itself,
often lasts for a relatively short period of time, and is often measured with social media
metrics, such as views, likes, and shares. Many studies have approached political attention through this perspective. Lu and Pan (2021) examined how different clickbait strategies used by Chinese government accounts on WeChat predicted views and likes.
Similarly, scholars have examined how content strategies used by politicians in social
media posts, such as personalization and emotional expressions influence the audience
engagement (Bene, 2017; Peng, 2021; Rathje et al., 2021).
We argue that it is also important to investigate the ripple effects of different content
strategies. By ripple effects, we mean that a piece of content can (1) accumulate followers and enlarge the audience base and (2) attract more attention and engagement for
messages published in the future. Some pioneering research has focused on the former
aspect by investigating the various tactics disinformation actors in far-right politics
exploit to gain followers. For example, Zhang et al. (2021) studied how influential users
and media outlets help IRA accounts accumulate followers on Twitter in the long run.
Similarly, Doroshenko and Lukito (2021) looked at how employing strategies, such as
the use of hashtags and URLs, influenced IRA accounts’ follower growth. Dawson and
Innes (2019) also investigated how IRA accounts accumulated an audience through strategies such as buying bot followers and follower fishing.
This distinction between immediate and ripple effects should be especially important
in the case of audience building. Extreme politics certainly help the outlet assemble an
audience of loyal partisans who circulate and amplify the outlet’s subsequent messages.
Meanwhile, viral entertaining media have the potential to reach a large audience base
that conventional political content is unable to attract, which aids the outlet in assembling an audience network and amplifying its voice. We proposed a series of hypotheses
(H1a, H1b, and H1c) on how both far-right political topics and viral entertaining videos
could attract immediate audience engagement. Here, we extend our hypotheses and
argue that these content strategies exert ripple effects on attention building and contribute to both follower growth and audience engagement with subsequent messages.
H2. Posts about (a) US politics, (b) China, and (c) viral entertaining videos are associated
with higher audience engagement with future posts than posts about other topics.

Peng et al.

9

H3. Posts about (a) US politics, (b) China, and (c) viral entertaining videos predict
audience growth.

Methods
Data
We retrieved the entire Facebook newsfeed of The Epoch Times (https://www.facebook.
com/epochtimes/) from CrowdTangle in January 2021 and kept posts published between
2013 and 2020 for analysis. This period covered the entire Trump presidency and when
The Epoch Times transitioned from a China-oriented publication to a far-right outlet. Our
dataset contained a total of 117,274 Facebook posts (for the distribution of posts, see
Figure A.1 in Supplementary Information).
To identify posts related to far-right ideologies and China issues, we employed topic
modeling. Meanwhile, we characterized viral entertaining videos by manually checking
video sources (for details, see below).

Topic modeling
As the average length of posts was short (M = 44.49, standard deviation (SD) = 27.53),3
we chose to apply non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to conduct topic modeling.
This technique performed particularly better than some conventional topic modeling
methods like Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)4 in processing short texts (Chen et al.,
2019; Sharaff and Nagwani, 2016). We preprocessed the Facebook posts by converting
the texts to lowercase, expanding contractions, stemming the texts, and removing punctuation, stop words, numbers, and one-character words. The number of topics generated
was determined by looking at coherence measures when navigating a wide range for this
parameter (see Figure A.3 in Supplementary Information). We then employed the NMF
from the Python Gensim package by using eight topics suggested by coherence measures. By manually checking the top words (see Table A.1 in Supplementary Information)
and representative posts (with the highest coefficients on the topic), we found that Topic
2—referring to US politics—and Topic 5—discussing China-related issues—built up
our measures on two specific groups of posts.

Measures
Prominence of US politics and China issues. To measure the prominence of these two groups
of posts, we looked at weights on topics for each document. The normalized weights on the
US politics topic (Topic 2, M = .12, SD = .24) and the normalized weights on China issues
(Topic 5, M = .11, SD = .21) were used to gauge the prominence of these two groups of
posts. We decided to employ continuous variables rather than dichotomized ones because
the former provided a more fine-grained measure of the prominence of the two issues.
Viral entertaining videos. To identify videos from viral video licensing companies, we first
compiled all the sources mentioned in the Facebook posts by checking phrases such as

10

new media & society 00(0)

Figure 2. The temporal trends of viral video proportion and average engagement.

“credit.” We kept sources that appeared at least .05% (59 posts) in the posts and manually
checked whether these companies were providing viral entertaining videos. In total, we
identified 10 such companies, for example, JukinVideo, ViralHog, and Storyful. The
detailed breakdown of each one can be found in Table A.2 in Supplementary Information. We thus identified viral entertaining videos (6.2%) with Facebook posts indicating
they were sourced from one of the viral video providers. The proportion of viral entertaining videos in all Facebook posts is portrayed in Figure 2.
We conducted a robustness check using the entertainment topic (Topic 4) as this
measure, which provided similar results (see Supplementary Information).
Engagement. The dependent variable is the average engagements to post, measured as
the mean numbers of likes, shares, and comments of posts (Cronbach’s alpha = .73).
Given the high skewness of average engagement, we conducted a logarithmic transformation to the measure (M = 3.99, SD = 1.80)5 and displayed the temporal change of average engagement of posts over time in Figure 2.
Follower growth. To understand how various content categories contribute to the assembly of audience networks, we measured follower increase as the percentage of follower
increase in a week (M = .65%, SD = 1.12%). We displayed the temporal trend of followers
of The Epoch Times in Figure 1. CrowdTangle only provided records of followers for The
Epoch Times since August 2017. Therefore, our analysis of follower growth focuses on
the weeks after August 2017.

Peng et al.

11

Analysis strategy
Ordinary least squares (OLS) regression and immediate attention. The unit of analysis
here was an individual post. To identify how various kinds of posts attract immediate
attention, we leveraged an OLS regression predicting engagement with posts by the
prominence of US political and China issues, and whether it was a viral entertaining
video.
Times series modeling and future attention. The ripple effects could not be investigated with simple OLS models, as the temporal dynamics require consideration. We
first grouped posts according to 418 weeks. We calculated the average prominence of
US political and China issues in all posts published each week according to the output of topic models, the ratio of viral entertaining videos, and the number of posts
generated.6
To apply the vector autoregression (VAR) model, we used data imputation forecasting techniques.7 The VAR model characterized the effects between an array of endogenous variables, which included all measured variables—the prominence of US political
and China issues, the ratio of viral entertaining videos, and the logged number of posts
published during each week—by predicting each endogenous variable by lags of itself
and other endogenous variables. We differenced—calculated the difference between
consecutive time points—the time series to fulfill the stationarity assumption of the
VAR model (Box-Steffensmeier et al., 2014). We then conducted Granger causality
tests and leveraged impulse response functions (IRFs) from the VAR models8 to inform
us about the ripple effects of one variable on another, particularly engagement to posts
(Zhang et al., 2021).9
OLS regression and follower increase. We ran another OLS regression to predict follower
increase in a week by the average proportions of US political and China-related topics in
posts published, the proportion of viral entertaining videos, and the logged number of
posts during the week.

Results
Temporal trends of topics
Figure 3 displays the temporal trends of eight topics identified through topic modeling.
We identified three groups of topics—politics, entertainment, and others (see Figure 4
for examples). First, as mentioned above, we characterized two political topics. Topic
2— US politics— increased from 2013 to 2020. Meanwhile, Topic 5—China issues—
decreased from 2013 to 2019, only briefly spiking in early 2020 due to the outbreak of
COVID-19. These patterns corroborated other observations that The Epoch Times
shifted its content focus from China to US politics. The second group of topics was
entertainment related. Topic 4 was mostly about viral entertaining videos.10 The prominence of this topic drastically changed over time in the window observed. Other topics
included both soft news and local issues. For more descriptions on these topics, see
Section B in Supplementary Information.

12

new media & society 00(0)

Figure 3. Temporal trends of the topic volumes of The Epoch Times Facebook Posts.

Immediate effects on audience engagement
Table 1 presents the results of the OLS regression predicting the average engagement
with posts by the prominence of US political and China issues and whether one post
contained a viral entertaining video. The unit of analysis was each individual Facebook
post. The results yielded that viral entertaining videos were associated with higher
engagement with Facebook posts (b = 3.20, se = .02, p < .001). The dependent variable
was log-transformed, meaning that a post containing viral entertaining videos predicted
an increase of post engagement by about 25 times.11 Meanwhile, as expected, US political issues predicted an increase of engagement by about 3.5 times (b = 1.26, se = .02,
p < .001), while China issues predicted a decrease of engagement of over 70% (b = −1.25,
se = .02, p < .001).12 These results suggested that H1a and H1c were supported, whereas
H1b was rejected.

Peng et al.

13

Figure 4. Exemplar Facebook posts of (A) US politics, (B) China issues, and (C) viral
entertaining videos.

Ripple effects on future audience engagement
The unit of analysis was each individual week. The two-way Granger Wald tests revealed
that the ratio of viral entertaining video and the prominence of US political issues significantly Granger caused engagement with posts (Table 2). However, further IRFs, which
considered controls (Figure 5), showed that the prominence of US political and China
issues did not significantly predict the increase of engagement. Still, the ratio of viral
entertaining video displayed a significant ripple effect in engagement with later Facebook
posts. The IRF suggested that one standard deviation increase in viral entertaining video
ratio increased by about 8% engagement with later Facebook posts. These results suggested that H2c was supported, whereas H2a and H2b were not.

14

new media & society 00(0)

Table 1. Immediate effects characterized by OLS regression.
Predictor

Coefficient

Viral entertaining video

3.20***
(.02)
1.26***
(.02)
–1.25***
(.02)
117,274

The US political issues
China issues
Observations
The dependent variable was the logged value of average engagement with the post.
OLS: ordinary least squares.
***p < .001.

Table 2. Two-Way Granger Causality Wald Tests.
Relationship

F

p-value

Viral video ratio → engagement
US political issues → engagement
China issues → engagement

11.85
5.31
.42

.001***
.022*
.518

Lag was one selected by BIC values.
BIC: Bayesian Information Criterion.
*p < .05, ***p < .001.

Figure 5. IRFs to characterize ripple effects. 95% bootstrap confidence interval, 100 runs
(cumulative effects).

Ripple effects on audience growth
We conducted another OLS to examine how published content explained the increase of
followers (Table 3). The unit of analysis was each individual week. We note that CrowdTangle
only provided audience numbers for a narrower time window from August 2017 to December

Peng et al.

15

Table 3. Predicting followers increase using OLS regression.
Predictor

Coefficient

Viral entertaining video

13.46***
(1.28)
–1.92*
(.80)
2.20*
(1.11)
.63**
(.19)
179

The US political issues
China issues
Posts published (logged)
Observations

The dependent variable was the percentage of increase in followers over the course of the week.
OLS: ordinary least squares.
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001.

2020. The results showed that viral entertaining videos significantly predicted the increase
of followers (b = 13.46, se = 1.28, p < .001). Specifically, a 1% increase in the ratio of viral
entertaining videos predicted a .13% increase of followers. To put this percentage in perspective, publishing 1% more viral entertaining videos would correspond to about 10,000
followers for The Epoch Times in December 2020 and about 9000 in December 2019. In
comparison, the prominence of US political issues significantly negatively predicted follower growth (b = –1.92, se = .80, p = .017), whereas the prominence of China issues showed
a significantly positive trend (b = 2.20, se = 1.11, p = .049). The numbers suggested that a 1%
increase in coverage of US political issues predicted a .02% decrease in followers, but a 1%
increase in coverage of China issues predicted a .02% increase in followers. The results supported H3b and H3c, while rejecting H3a.
We conducted a series of robustness checks. See Supplementary Information for more
details.

Discussion
In summary, our research expands the scope of far-right media research by considering
the process of audience building, which is a precondition for spreading far-right politics.
We consider both the immediate and ripple effects of different content strategies. We
found that US partisan issues helped The Epoch Times attract immediate audience
engagement, but such content did not invite audience growth and engagement in the
future. In comparison, viral entertaining videos, while seemingly benign and mundane,
demonstrated superb effects in getting audience responses, accumulating followers, and
boosting engagement with subsequent posts.

Entertainment media in political communication research
Our research highlights the crucial role of entertainment media in directing audience
attention. We compare two logics of attention building: one focused on extreme politics,

16

new media & society 00(0)

and the other on entertainment. We show that The Epoch Times transitioned from an
outlet centered on criticizing the Chinese government to an actor extensively spreading
far-right politics in the United States. Such extreme politics attracted high audience
engagement, indicating that disseminating hyper-partisan and toxic politics does help
political actors compete in the attention economy. However, the immediate attention
generated by such content did not convert to follower growth and audience engagement
in the future, indicating that solely relying on a niche set of political content might limit
expansion of the audience base.
In comparison, we reveal the superb effects of viral entertaining videos in attracting
audience attention. These videos, while seemingly harmless, mundane, and humorous,
may do harm by building an audience base for malicious political actors. Previous studies
have identified several ways of how entertainment media can shape political processes.
Some genres of entertainment media, such as talk shows, may be gateways of political
knowledge for politically inattentive individuals (Baum, 2003; Hollander, 2005; Kim and
Vishak, 2008). Our study highlights another less examined political function of entertainment media: it can effectively direct the flow of political attention and be exploited by
malicious political actors to accumulate an audience base that amplifies their voices.
These findings echo two observations made in previous research. First, various political actors engage in non-political content to accumulate attention. Scholars studying
IRA’s disinformation activities revealed a strategy called narrative switching: accounts
first talk about mundane issues and then transition to hyper-political topics (Dawson and
Innes, 2019). Government officials in China often produce non-propaganda content,
such as health tips and food recipes, to get audience clicks and views, knowing that most
social media users do not actively seek political information (Lu and Pan, 2021). Second,
more broadly, our research joins an emerging line of scholarship showing that only a
small segment of social media users is highly engaged with politics (Guess et al., 2019a;
Mukerjee et al., 2022; Wojcieszak et al., 2023), let alone extreme and radical politics
(Grinberg et al., 2019; Hosseinmardi et al., 2021).
Together, these findings prompt us to reflect on the political information landscape
in social media. The scope of problematic political communication should not be limited to a group of active actors who fiercely circulate verbal onslaughts, outrages, and
conspiracies that sow division and destabilize democracy. Outside this battlefield of
political discourse, a group of less politically engaged users might use social media for
other purposes, but they could be readily assembled into an attention-expansion army of
political information actors and act as amplifiers of political information messages. This
study again highlights the hybrid and connected nature of social media communications
(Zhang et al., 2021).

Temporal dynamics of attention building
Our second contribution underscores the temporal process of attention building. We need
to understand how malicious actors set the stage for political information content and
build an audience network, which is a precondition for the circulation of political information. It is crucial to study both the immediate and ripple effects of information strategies. The spread of far-right politics requires not only committed political junkies, but

Peng et al.

17

also a base of peripheral users who may be more drawn to entertaining content, who are
assembled around political information actors and can contribute to the circulation of
far-right information.
While our research focuses on a specific political information actor—The Epoch
Times—our theoretical framework, which incorporates the use of entertainment content
and distinguishes between immediate and ripple effects of content strategies, can be
applied to a wide range of political communication contexts. For example, scholars
investigating politicians’ self-presentation strategies on social media often reveal a positive effect of personalized and non-political content on garnering audience engagement
(Bene, 2017; Peng 2021). How such content further influences audience engagement
with political content in the future and helps politicians accumulate an active following
remains a promising research direction.

Implications and limitations
Our study provides significant social and policy implications. If entertainment media
plays a critical role in directing audience attention toward political content, then there
needs to be serious discussions and examination on this type of content, as well as companies that continuously provide such content to political actors. Entertainment media
should be subject to more public scrutiny, and policymakers and the public need to be
better informed about the content and companies involved.
Several limitations of this study should be acknowledged. First, we have only analyzed one media outlet. Although we believe that the strategy of using feel-good videos
and other entertainment content to drive up engagement is by no means exclusive to The
Epoch Times, more empirical evidence is needed to make more generalizable arguments.
Second, our data come from only one social media platform—Facebook. Previous
research suggests that users are less likely to consume political information and engage
in political discussions on Facebook than on Twitter (Guess et al., 2019b). Therefore, it
remains to be tested whether the viral entertainment content strategy works with similar
effects on platforms other than Facebook.
In addition, we still know very little about the viral video licensing companies that
discover and distribute viral content to media outlets. The lack of knowledge about these
content providers and the viral content industry significantly hinders our understanding
of the behaviors of political media outlets on social media. Future studies on viral video
licensing companies are encouraged.
While our study sheds light on how viral entertaining videos help outlets like The
Epoch Times expand its audience base for far-right content, it does not directly investigate the political effects of this content on its audience. Although exposure and
attention are often the first steps to produce effects, it remains an open question to
what extent The Epoch Times’ messages shape the minds and behaviors of its audience. In addition, our study reveals the actual effects of political actors’ use of nonpolitical content on audience building, rather than their intentions behind it. While we
may assume that these actors are motivated by the economic incentives of the attention economy, it is difficult to claim whether they are attempting to spread their farright or extreme ideology through this tactic. Our study’s reliance on digital traces

18

new media & society 00(0)

data precludes direct answers to this question. Future research employing other methods could provide insights into the political effects of entertainment media or far-right
outlets’ intentionality.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Sean Fischer, Yiyan Zhang, Saif Shahin, Yini Zhang, and Kun Xu
for their feedback and help on earlier versions of the article.

Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

ORCID iDs
Yilang Peng
Tian Yang
Kecheng Fang

https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7711-9518
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2642-4760
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1674-1543

Supplemental material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.

Notes
1. Donald Trump has been linked to the US far-right, with some of his policies and actions
seen as aligning with far-right ideologies. Some far-right groups and individuals have also
expressed support for him.
2. Ad Fontes provides a measure of media partisan bias by using trained analysts across the
political spectrum to evaluate media messages, which was used by previous studies (e.g.
Huszár et al., 2022).
3. The distribution of post lengths is displayed in Figure A.2 in Supplementary Information. The
unit here is a word.
4. Still, we ran Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) as an alternative topic model to check
the robustness of our findings, which supported our conclusions (see Appendix C in
Supplementary Information).
5. The unit here is an engagement (a like, a share, or a comment).
6. Logarithmic transformation was first conducted to address the skewness of distribution before
further analysis.
7. Only five data points were imputed using ARIMA models. We applied imputation because
further time series analyses required that there should be no missing data. Still, we applied
the VAR model to data without imputed data points for the robustness check by taking the
imputed time points out. The results supported our findings (see Robustness section and
Supplementary Information).
8. We set the lag as one according to BIC measures.

Peng et al.

19

9. We present results based on engagement to all posts as main results. We also conducted a
robustness test using engagement to non-viral entertaining video posts, which demonstrated
the same result.
10. The association between a week’s Topic 4 ratio and the ratio of viral entertaining videos was .97.
11. Exp(3.20) = 24.53.
12. We noticed that US political issues were discussed more in recent periods, when The Epoch
Times already accumulated a huge audience base. We addressed the concern of time as a
potential confounder in the Robustness section by considering the time fixed-effects, which
again supported our findings.

References
Alba D (2021) Epoch Media casts wider net to spread its message online. Available at: https://
www.nytimes.com/2021/03/09/technology/epoch-media-right-wing-disinformation.html
Aslett K, Guess AM, Bonneau R, et al. (2022) News credibility labels have limited average effects
on news diet quality and fail to reduce misperceptions. Science Advances 8(18): eabl3844.
Atkinson JD, Ingman K, Pierandozzi JPJ and Stump P (2021) At the Intersection of mainstream & alternative media: Spygate & the Hannity rant. Journal of Communication Inquiry 45(3): 209–224.
Bauer AJ, Nadler A and Nelson JL (2022) What is Fox News? Partisan journalism, misinformation, and the problem of classification. Electronic News 16(1): 18–29.
Baum MA (2003) Soft news and political knowledge: evidence of absence or absence of evidence?
Political Communication 20(2): 173–190.
Bechmann A (2020) Tackling disinformation and infodemics demands media policy changes.
Digital Journalism 8(6): 855–863.
Bene M (2017) Go viral on the Facebook! Interactions between candidates and followers on Facebook
during the Hungarian general election campaign of 2014. Information, Communication &
Society 20(4): 513–529.
Benkler Y, Faris R and Roberts H (2018) Network Propaganda: Manipulation, Disinformation,
and Radicalization in American Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bittman L (1985) The KGB and Soviet Disinformation: An Insider’s View. Washington, DC:
Pergamon-Brassey’s.
Boukes M (2019) Agenda-setting with satire: How political satire increased TTIP’s saliency on the
public, media, and political agenda. Political Communication 36(3): 426–451.
Box-Steffensmeier JM, Freeman JR, Hitt MP, et al. (2014) Time Series Analysis for the Social
Sciences. Cambridge University Press.
Brady WJ, McLoughlin K, Doan TN, and Crockett MJ (2021) How social learning amplifies moral
outrage expression in online social networks. Science Advances 7(33): eabe5641.
Bucher T (2018) If . . . Then: Algorithmic Power and Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chen Y, Zhang H, Liu R, et al. (2019) Experimental explorations on short text topic mining
between LDA and NMF based schemes. Knowledge-Based Systems 163: 1–13.
Collins B (2019) Facebook says a pro-Trump media outlet used artificial intelligence to create
fake people and push conspiracies. Available at: https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/
facebook-says-pro-trump-media-outlet-used-artificial-intelligence-create-n1105951
Daniels J (2009) Cyber Racism: White Supremacy Online and the New Attack on Civil Rights.
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Dawson A and Innes M (2019) How Russia’s Internet Research Agency built its disinformation
campaign. The Political Quarterly 90(2): 245–256.
Deem A (2019) Extreme speech| The digital traces of #whitegenocide and alt-right affective economies of transgression. International Journal of Communication 13: 20.

20

new media & society 00(0)

Doroshenko L and Lukito J (2021) Trollfare: Russia’s disinformation campaign during military
conflict in Ukraine. International Journal of Communication 15: 4662–4689.
Figenschou TU and Ihlebæk KA (2019) Challenging journalistic authority. Journalism Studies
20(9): 1221–1237.
Grinberg N, Joseph K, Friedland L, et al. (2019) Fake news on Twitter during the 2016 US presidential election. Science 363(6425): 374–378.
Guess A, Munger K, Nagler J, et al. (2019a) How accurate are survey responses on social media
and politics? Political Communication 36(2): 241–258.
Guess A, Nagler J and Tucker J (2019b) Less than you think: prevalence and predictors of fake
news dissemination on Facebook. Science Advances 5(1). Available at: https://www.science.
org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aau4586
Haller A, Holt K and de La Brosse R (2019) The other alternatives: political right-wing alternative
media. Journal of Alternative & Community Media 4(1): 1–6.
Heft A, Mayerhöffer E, Reinhardt S, et al. (2020) Beyond Breitbart: comparing right-wing digital
news infrastructures in six Western democracies. Policy & Internet 12(1): 20–45.
Hmielowski JD, Holbert RL and Lee J (2011) Predicting the consumption of political TV satire: affinity for political humor, The Daily Show, and The Colbert Report. Communication
Monographs 78(1): 96–114.
Hollander BA (2005) Late-night learning: do entertainment programs increase political campaign
knowledge for young viewers? Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 49(4): 402–415.
Hosseinmardi H, Ghasemian A, Clauset A, Mobius M, Rothschild DM and Watts DJ (2021)
Examining the consumption of radical content on YouTube. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 118(32): e2101967118.
Hussain MM (2012) Journalism’s digital disconnect: the growth of campaign content and entertainment gatekeepers in viral political information. Journalism 13(8): 1024–1040.
Huszár F, Ktena SI, O’Brien C, et al. (2022) Algorithmic amplification of politics on Twitter.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119(1): e2025334119.
Ilkowski F (2021) Anti-communism as ideology. Communist and Post-Communist Studies 54(1–
2): 1–23.
Keiles JL (2016) How Jukin Media built a viral-video empire. The New York Times, 27 December.
Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/27/magazine/how-jukin-media-built-a-viralvideo-empire.html
Khan ML (2017) Social media engagement: what motivates user participation and consumption on
YouTube? Computers in Human Behavior 66: 236–247.
Kim JW, Guess A, Nyhan B, and Reifler J (2021) The distorting prism of social media: How selfselection and exposure to incivility fuel online comment toxicity. Journal of Communication,
71(6): 922–946.
Kim YM and Vishak J (2008) Just laugh! You don’t need to remember: the effects of entertainment media on political information acquisition and information processing in political judgment. Journal of Communication 58(2): 338–360.
Klinger U and Svensson J (2015) The emergence of network media logic in political communication: a theoretical approach. New Media & Society 17(8): 1241–1257.
Klinger U and Svensson J (2018) The end of media logics? On algorithms and agency. New Media
& Society 20(12): 4653–4670.
Knobloch-Westerwick S, Robinson M, Frazer R, et al. (2021) “Affective news” and attitudes: a
multi-topic experiment of attitude impacts from political news and fiction. Journalism &
Mass Communication Quarterly 98(4): 1078–1103.
Koerber B (2018) How one company reshaped—And kind of ruined—The viral video landscape.
Mashable, 6 August. Available at: https://mashable.com/article/jukin-media-viral-videos

Peng et al.

21

Lazer DMJ, Baum MA, Benkler Y, et al. (2018) The science of fake news. Science 359(6380):
1094–1096.
Lewis JR (2019) “Clarifying the Truth”: Falun Gong’s media strategies. In: Lewis JR and Huang C
(eds) Enlightened Martyrdom: The Hidden Side of Falun Gong. Sheffield: Equinox Publishing,
pp. 244–259.
Lu Y and Pan J (2021) Capturing clicks: how the Chinese Government uses Clickbait to compete
for visibility. Political Communication 38(1–2): 23–54.
Lu Y, Su Y and Zhou N (2018) Doctrinal innovation, resistance, and Falun Gong’s politicization.
China Review 18(4): 41–62.
Markay L (2021) Epoch Times revenue soared on Trump conspiracies. Available at: https://
www.axios.com/epoch-times-revenue-trump-conspiracies-f96418d6-b361-4686-8cf1bf13d33e7460.html
Marwick A and Lewis R (2017) Media Manipulation and Disinformation Online. Data & Society.
Available at: https://datasociety.net/library/media-manipulation-and-disinfo-online/
Moreno-Almeida C and Gerbaudo P (2021) Memes and the Moroccan far-right. The International
Journal of Press/politics 26(4): 882–906.
Mukerjee S, Jaidka K and Lelkes Y (2022) The political landscape of the US Twitterverse. Political
Communication 39(5): 565–588.
Nahon K and Hemsley J (2013) Going Viral. Cambridge: Polity.
Ownby D (2008) Falun Gong and the Future of China. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peng Y (2021) What makes politicians’ Instagram posts popular? Analyzing social media strategies of candidates and office holders with computer vision. The International Journal of
Press/Politics 26(1): 143–166.
Rathje S, Van Bavel JJ and van der Linden S (2021) Out-group animosity drives engagement on
social media. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118(26): e2024292118.
Repnikova M and Fang K (2018) Authoritarian participatory persuasion 2.0: netizens as thought
work collaborators in China. Journal of Contemporary China 27(113): 763–779.
Roose K (2020) How The Epoch Times created a giant influence machine. The New York Times,
24 October. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/24/technology/epoch-timesinfluence-falun-gong.html
Roth FS, Weinmann C, Schneider FM, et al. (2014) Seriously entertained: antecedents and consequences of hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment experiences with political talk shows on
TV. Mass Communication and Society 17(3): 379–399.
Scrivens R and Amarasingam A (2020) Haters Gonna “Like”: exploring Canadian far-right
extremism on Facebook. In: Littler M and Lee B (eds) Digital Extremisms: Readings in
Violence, Radicalisation and Extremism in the Online Space. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, pp. 63–89.
Sharaff A and Nagwani NK (2016) Email thread identification using latent Dirichlet allocation
and non-negative matrix factorization based clustering techniques. Journal of Information
Science 42(2): 200–212.
Stroud NJ (2017) Attention as a valuable resource. Political Communication 34(3): 479–489.
Stier S, Posch L, Bleier A and Strohmaier M (2017) When populists become popular: Comparing
Facebook use by the right-wing movement Pegida and German political parties. Information,
Communication & Society 20(9): 1365–1388.
Thobani S (2019) Alt-Right with the Hindu-right: long-distance nationalism and the perfection of
Hindutva. Ethnic and Racial Studies 42(5): 745–762.
Thorson K and Wells C (2016) Curated flows: a framework for mapping media exposure in the
digital age. Communication Theory 26(3): 309–328.

22

new media & society 00(0)

Trillò T and Shifman L (2021) Memetic commemorations: remixing far-right values in digital
spheres. Information, Communication & Society 24(16): 2482–2501.
Tsfati Y, Tukachinsky R and Peri Y (2009) Exposure to news, political comedy, and entertainment
talk shows: concern about security and political mistrust. International Journal of Public
Opinion Research 21(4): 399–423.
van Zuylen-Wood S (2021) MAGA-land’s favorite newspaper. The Atlantic, 13 January. Available
at: https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2021/01/inside-the-epoch-times-a-mysteriouspro-trump-newspaper/617645/
Weimann G and Masri N (2023) Research note: spreading hate on TikTok. Studies in Conflict &
Terrorism 46: 752–765.
Weinmann C and Vorderer P (2018) A normative perspective for political entertainment research:
connecting deliberative democracy and entertainment theory. Communication Theory 28(4):
466–486.
Wilson J (2021) Falun Gong-aligned media push fake news about Democrats and Chinese communists. The Guardian, 30 April. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/
apr/30/falun-gong-media-epoch-times-democrats-chinese-communists
Wodak R (2020) The Politics of Fear: The Shameless Normalization of Far-Right Discourse.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wojcieszak M, de Leeuw S, Menchen-Trevino E, et al. (2023) No polarization from partisan news:
over-time evidence from trace data. The International Journal of Press/Politics 28: 601–626.
Woolley SC and Howard PN (2018) Computational Propaganda: Political Parties, Politicians,
and Political Manipulation on Social Media. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yang T and Fang K (2023) How dark corners collude: a study on an online Chinese alt-right community. Information, Communication & Society 26(2): 441–458.
Zhang X and Davis M (2022) E-extremism: a conceptual framework for studying the online far
right. New Media & Society. Epub ahead of print 7 June. DOI: 10.1177/14614448221098360.
Zhang Y, Lukito J, Su M-H, et al. (2021) Assembling the networks and audiences of disinformation: how successful Russian IRA Twitter accounts built their followings, 2015–2017.
Journal of Communication 71(2): 305–331.
Zhao Y (2003) Falun Gong, identity, and the struggle over meaning inside and Outside China. In:
Couldry N and Curran J (eds) Contesting Media Power: Alternative Media in a Networked
World. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, pp. 209–224.

Author biographies
Yilang Peng (PhD, Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania) is an assistant professor in the Department of Financial Planning, Housing and Consumer Economics at the
University of Georgia. His scholarship is at the intersection of computational social science, visual
communication, science communication, and social media analytics.
Tian Yang (PhD, Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania) is an assistant professor at the School of Journalism and Communication at the Chinese University of Hong
Kong. His research is at the intersection of political communication, digital media, and computational social science.
Kecheng Fang (PhD, Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania) is an
assistant professor at the School of Journalism and Communication at The Chinese University of
Hong Kong. His research interests include journalism, political communication, and digital media.

