1099173

research-article2022

NMS0010.1177/14614448221099173new media & societyLiu et al.

Article

Hashtag activism in a
politicized pandemic:
Framing the campaign to
include Taiwan in the
World Health Organization’s
efforts to combat COVID-19

new media & society
2024, Vol. 26(6) 3213­–3234
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448221099173
DOI: 10.1177/14614448221099173
journals.sagepub.com/home/nms

Anita KC Liu , Yotam Ophir and Shu-An Tsai
University at Buffalo, USA

Dror Walter

Georgia State University, USA

Itai Himelboim

University of Georgia, USA

Abstract
We examined hashtag activism promoting Taiwan’s participation in the global
efforts to combat COVID-19. We employed the computational Analysis of
Topic Model Networks (ANTMN) to examine the discourse around the
#TaiwanCanHelp/#TWforWHO campaign in 2020 (N = 163,876) on Twitter. Our
model identified 35 topics clustered within three frames. The containment frame
emphasized strategies used to stop COVID-19’s spread in Taiwan. The geopolitics
frame described China’s use of its international power to exclude Taiwan from the
World Health Organization. The international cooperation frame emphasized Taiwan’s
ability and efficacy to contribute to the global efforts to slow down COVID-19. These
results extend our understanding of hashtag activism by examining the intersection
of geopolitics and global health crises. We introduce the theoretical concept of a
mutually beneficial coalition, one that points to detrimental impacts of oppression on
both the oppressed and the allies who are asked to help.

Corresponding author:
Anita KC Liu, University at Buffalo, 359 Baldy Hall, Buffalo, NY 14228, USA.
Email: kueichun@buffalo.edu

3214

new media & society 26(6)

Keywords
COVID-19, online campaigning, hashtag activism, Taiwan and China, topic model
networks
At a time of a global public health crisis, Taiwan, despite a physical proximity to the outbreak’s epicenter in China, maintained one of the lowest numbers of COVID-19 cases and
deaths in the world in 2020 (The New York Times [NYT], 2020). In light of Taiwan’s relative success in fighting COVID-19, politicians and public figures worldwide, for example, Canadian Prime Minster Justin Trudeau, Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga,
and US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, have urged the World health Organization
(WHO) to include Taiwan in this global fight against the epidemic (Ching, 2020; Lin,
2020). However, at the time of writing (February 2022), more than 2 years after the initial
cases of COVID-19 were discovered, Taiwan remains ineligible to join the United Nations
(UN) due to political reasons driven by China’s “One China policy” and, as a result, is
excluded from the WHO. On 10 February 2020, a Taiwanese YouTuber, Ray Du, called in
a viral YouTube video (Ray Du English, 2020, available at https://youtu.be/hpxfdAAD4g4)
for the inclusion of Taiwan in the WHO during COVID-19, explaining the political background to its exclusion and promoting the hashtag #TWforWHO. On 14 April 2020, Du
introduced a second hashtag, #TaiwanCanHelp, in a paid advertisement in the NYT.
Hashtag activism aims at setting public and news media agendas through online
grassroots activity (Kilgo et al., 2019). At the heart of hashtag activism is the consistent
and unified use of linguistic cues and symbols, including hashtags, that project a sense of
solidarity, coherence, and social presence (Freelon et al., 2018). Hashtag campaigns can
increase awareness to social groups’ causes and struggles (Kilgo et al., 2019) but also
allow groups to attempt to promote specific frames that interpret the events and social
tensions through their point of view, a capability traditionally reserved to mass media
only (Gitlin, 1980; McLeod and Shah, 2015).
Prior research on hashtag activism focused primarily on the relationship between a
majority and oppressed minorities within a given country. Despite being understudied,
recent campaigns have demonstrated the utility of hashtags at times of international conflicts (Zeitzoff, 2018). In such cases, social media, and its unique affordances and features, such as hashtags, allow groups that were traditionally limited in cultural power
(under more hierarchical models of mass communication) to make their voice heard in a
more egalitarian communication environment in which international affairs take place
(Gabel et al., 2020). In other words, social media provide more possibilities for periphery
countries to participate in international affairs that were traditionally dominated by core
countries, even on the Internet (Himelboim, 2010).
These media opportunities became evident during COVID-19, as the global nature
of public health crises like epidemics requires international cooperation, coordination,
and communication (Reynolds and Seeger, 2005). The social and psychological needs
associated with a public health crisis of such magnitude have led to intensive use of
social media by both leaders, who took to Twitter and Facebook to communicate with
their concerned citizens (Rufai and Bunce, 2020), and the public, that used in search
for information and social support (Stella et al., 2020). Importantly, some of

Liu et al.

3215

the international communication around COVID-19 consisted of scapegoating and
blaming of specific groups and countries, as was evident in the emergence of the
hashtag #ChinaLiedPeopleDied (Petersen and Gerken, 2021).
Under these complex psychological and geopolitical circumstances, the Taiwanese
campaign studied here is unique in its focus on the detrimental impact of oppression on
both minority (also called counter-publics, see Kuo, 2018) and majority international
actors. To clarify, this study uses the term oppressed groups to refer to those who are
discriminated against in global decision-making processes due to power imbalances
(Young, 1989). Young (1989) argued that while all social groups are encouraged to speak
in participatory democratic structures, some groups are commonly amplified as others
are silenced. We refrain from using the term counter-publics that is often associated with
hashtag activism research that focuses on attempts to produce alternative narratives that
deconstruct dominant discourse (Wonneberger et al., 2021). We believe the term
oppressed group is more adequate than counter-publics in our context.
As discussed in detail next, the #TaiwanCanHelp campaign had advocated for the
inclusion of Taiwan in the WHO’s efforts to contain COVID-19. While prior studies on
hashtag activism in the context of gender (Clark-Parsons, 2021; Jackson et al., 2020) and
race (Freelon et al., 2016) have focused on minorities’ attempts to reveal abuses of power
and gain support through digital allyship, the Taiwanese campaign presented a more balanced power structure: on one hand, it pointed to China’s oppression of Taiwan that
resulted in Taiwan’s exclusion from the WHO and the coordinated efforts to combat
COVID-19. On the other hand, it emphasized Taiwan’s impressive containment record
and its ability to provide information and equipment that could support other countries
around the world during the public health crisis. By doing so, the Taiwanese campaign
reconceptualized the notion of allyship, calling for a more balanced, mutually beneficial
coalition, one that points to the detrimental impact of oppression on both dominant actors
and oppressed groups.
In the next sections, we introduce the political and social background of the hashtag
campaign, analyze the full corpus of Twitter activity employing the hashtags, and discuss
ways through which our findings of this complex case study, which occurred in the intersection of geopolitics and public health, can extend the current theoretical understanding
of hashtag activism.

Hashtag activism
Ray Du’s campaign, calling for people around the world to promote the hashtags
#TWforWHO and #TaiwanCanHelp, can be seen as an example of hashtag activism
(Jackson et al., 2020). The proliferation of social media has opened the door for a new
type of political activism for individuals (Chan et al., 2018; Oyeyemi et al., 2014). Due
to the structure of social networks and social media, online social movements could
gain collective power through the consistent use of language and symbols, such as
hashtags (Clark, 2019; Freelon et al., 2018). Connectivity plays a central role in amplifying oppressed groups or “counter-publics.” The use of consistent hashtags resonates
“across different individual actors, who in turn have different connections across
media and platforms” (Kuo, 2018: 509). Examples from contemporary social media

3216

new media & society 26(6)

activities for social change employing hashtag activism include the organization and
coordination of protests during the 2011 Arab Spring (González-Bailón et al., 2011),
Black Lives Matter (Freelon et al., 2016), and the Me Too movement (Jackson et al.,
2020), to name just a few. One of the keys to successful online activism remains the
emergence and use of consistent linguistic cues, including hashtags, that allow movements to efficiently and effectively diffuse and control messages (Jackson et al., 2020).
Early examples of hashtag activism for the purpose of empowering social movements
include the 2009 #IranElection or the 2011 #OccupyWallStreet campaigns (Clark,
2019; González-Bailón et al., 2013). More recently, hashtag activism was used by
those protesting police brutality against Black Americans, who relied heavily on the
#BlackLivesMatter and #BLM hashtags (Freelon et al., 2016). Successful use of
hashtags by social movements could lead to a sense of unity (Freelon et al., 2016) and
social and psychological support (Jackson et al., 2020). For example, social movements focusing on issues of gender inequality have successfully used hashtags such as
#MeToo, #AllMenCan, #TheEmptyChair, and #WhyIStayed in recent years to promote their cause (Clark, 2016; Jackson et al., 2020).
Hashtag activism often serves to expose power relations and abuse (Banet-Weiser,
2015) in hope for a transformation and change (Clark, 2016). The goal in such cases is to
challenge social norms and realities of inequality by increasing their visibility (ClarkParsons, 2021). Salience and framing, in turn, allow organizations to gain solidarity and
support from people outside of the protesting social group. For example, using hashtag
activism, the Me Too movement managed to gain solidarity and support across gender
lines when using the hashtag #AllMenCan alongside #MeToo (Clark, 2019). As most
social media users are being followed by only a very small amount of people (Mustafaraj
et al., 2011), hashtag activists often benefit from the help of celebrities and other online
personas who could amplify their message and increase its share (Ellcessor, 2018).
Key to hashtag activism is the amplification of oppressed groups’ messages by
either celebrities or out-group publics, known as digital allyship (Clark, 2019; LevineRasky and Ghaffar-Siddiqui, 2020). Digital allyship aims to maximize collective
power of marginalized groups by increasing network size and diversifying participation by the inclusion of privileged social groups. At times, social movements interact
with other parallel movements in act of solidarity. As argued by Clark (2019: 4),
“hashtag networks create opportunities for people standing at the intersection of multiple, overlapping oppressions to build coalitions and deconstruct interlocking systems
of power.” Taken together, those efforts to increase visibility and control the message
eventually help movements to attract attention from mainstream media and reach the
general public (Freelon et al., 2016).

The geopolitical context of the Taiwanese hashtag
campaign
The abovementioned examples of hashtag activism show how social media could
empower those hoping to challenge social injustice. While in many cases activism was
directed inwards, that is, toward political and social oppression within subpopulations of
the same countries, at times it was also used by states wishing to emphasize and bring to

Liu et al.

3217

the agenda issues related to international relations and diplomacy (e.g. Duncombe,
2017). Notably, geopolitical conflicts such as the Gaza conflict (Zeitzoff, 2018) and the
Kashmir conflict (Gabel et al., 2020) have triggered the emergence of international activism that often organized its communication in search for global allyship around hashtags
in attempts to gain international support and global allyship. Interestingly, in some conflicts, both sides have used hashtags in the virtual competition over public opinion. Such
was the case with the competing hashtags #GazaUnderAttack and #IsraelUnderAttack,
in which both sides used a variation on the same hashtag to attract global attention to
what it perceived to be its oppression (Zeitzoff, 2018). Similarly, Indian tweeters used
social media to negatively portray Burhan Wani, a commander of an Islamist militant
organization that was active in the Jammu and Kashmir conflicts. As a response,
Pakistanians and Muslims used the hashtags #IAmBurhan, #BurhanWani, and
#PakistanStandsWithKashmir to show solidarity with the organization’s causes (Gabel
et al., 2020). As was evident in these and other cases (for example, during the conflicts
between Russia and Ukraine, see Jost et al., 2018), a large share of these communications
were done in English, a strategy hoping to draw international support (Jost et al., 2018).
These studies speak to Twitter’s ability to serve as a global online public sphere
(Guo et al., 2019), with the capacity to attract Western media attention. As most of
these studies related to geopolitical conflicts in the Middle East and Europe, relatively
little is known about how Asian countries (and countries in the Global South in general) that have historically been struggling with imperialism and colonialism can use
social media to extend their influence in the path to de-imperialization and decolonization (Duara, 2004).
Scholars have shown hashtags to be a common tool for communicating around the
pandemic (e.g. #FireFauci), some of which in search of social support (#StayStrong or
#InItTogether), and in some cases even for directing blame toward other countries, such
as with #ChinaMustPay, #ChinaMustExplain, and #ChinaLiedPeopleDied (Petersen and
Gerken, 2021). These trends culminated and combined in the campaign we study here, in
which Taiwanese attempted to call for the inclusion of Taiwan in the global efforts
against COVID-19 while pointing a blaming finger toward China and the world’s compliance with its One China Policy (Wang, 2000).
Thus, the Taiwanese campaign, described next, is not merely a call for joining an
international health organization, nor was it happening in isolation from global trends
and international tensions. COVID-19 erupted shortly after global attention was turned
during the Trump presidency to tensions between the United States and China, for example, over trade, all part of a broader competition for power in the world system between
the two global forces (Liu and Woo, 2018). Under these volatile circumstances, a campaign in English that calls for a recognition in Taiwan’s sovereignty, that takes place
primarily over American-owned social media platforms such as YouTube and Twitter,
and that involves American citizens and public figures is likely to be perceived by China
as a Western provocation and as a threat. In other words, the campaign may not only
communicate a Western support in Taiwan’s plea to join the WHO, but could more
broadly symbolize the United States’ decades-old relationship with Taiwan, which is of
great concern to China.

3218

new media & society 26(6)

The #TWforWHO/#TaiwanCanHelp campaign
The political conflicts around Taiwan’s sovereignty and independence from China date
back to the Chinese Civil War of 1949. Following the war, the Chinese nationalist party
(Kuomintang, or KMT) and its supporters retreated to the island of Taiwan, making
Taipei their capital, with the hope to return to mainland China in the future (Bush, 2013).
At first, Taiwanese leaders, including the chairman of the KMT in the 1980s, Lee TengHui, described their party as a “defeated, exiled regime existing under the global coldwar structure” or simply as a “regime from the outside,” thus indicating that they
continued to perceive themselves the legitimate rulers of China (Chen, 2010: 154). In the
years that followed the defeat to Mao Zedong’s communist armies, the new Taiwanese
government targeted and prosecuted dissidents who were suspected of advocating
democracy, communication, or independence from China, an era dubbed the “White
Terror” (Chen, 2008). However, over the years, Taiwan adopted characteristics of
Western modernity, including a shift to a multiparty system and the adoption of capitalism (breaking away in that regard from the Chinese commitment to socialism).
In addition, Taiwan strengthened its relations with the West and with the United
States, which saw the tensions between Taiwan and Communist China as part of the
broader geopolitical trends of the Cold War. Taiwanese author Kuan-Hsing Chen
(2010: 18) described the Taiwanese desire for sovereignty as taking place “under the
neocolonial structure where Taiwan’s economy, international politics, and culture have
been subordinated to those of the United States and Japan,” an international position
he describes as a “Taiwanese subempire” (pp. 18, 61). Indeed, the United States and its
Western allies have played a key role in Taiwan’s history, going back to its release from
Japanese control following World War II (Fell, 2006). The United States later supported Taiwan’s rapid industrialization and economic growth, known as the Taiwan
Miracle, due to its continuing distancing and independence from Communist China
(Cullather, 1996). These trends culminated with the first Taiwanese presidential election in 1996 (Fell, 2006). A key source of tension between Taiwan’s current political
camps is the question of whether or not Taiwan should strive for independence from
mainland China (Qi, 2012).
To this day, China refuses to accept and recognize Taiwan’s independence, a position
known as One China Principle, according to which nations and international organizations that wish to maintain relations with China cannot conduct official relationships
with Taiwan (Barrett, 2019; Wang, 2000). While countries like the United States do not
endorse the Principle, they acknowledge it (US Department of State, 2018). A consequence of acknowledging the One China principle, which is called the One China Policy
by the US government and the governments in the majority of countries in the world, is
that nations and international actors cannot support Taiwan’s plea to join international
organizations, a move that will acknowledge Taiwan’s sovereignty (Bush, 2017; Hickson,
2003). As a result, Taiwan is not included in the UN and, as a result, is also excluded
from the WHO (Barrett, 2019; BBC News, 2020; Cyranoski, 2003).
The request to include Taiwan in international activity resurfaced during COVID19. Despite its physical proximity to China, and the fact that more than 407,000 of
Taiwan’s population of 24 million worked in China during in 2019 (Su and Han,

Liu et al.

3219

2020), Taiwan had one of the lowest numbers of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) cases and
deaths in the world in 2020 (The NYT, 2020). Those numbers substantially diverge
from early estimations by researchers at John Hopkins University, who predicted that
Taiwan would be one of the countries most affected by the virus (Schifrin, 2020).
Taiwan’s relative success story of combating the spread of COVID-19 could have
been harnessed and adopted by international health organizations and other countries
struggling with the spread of the virus and its devastating consequences. However,
such international cooperation and mutual learning are hindered by Taiwan’s exclusion from the WHO (Reuters, 2020c).
Given coronavirus’ threat to global health, politicians worldwide have urged the
WHO to include Taiwan in this global fight (Blanchard and Nebehay, 2020; Lin, 2020).
Those advocating for the inclusion of Taiwan pointed to the country’s improved response
to COVID-19 compared with the 2003 SARS outbreak (Hsieh et al., 2004). During the
SARS outbreak, Taiwanese scientists and politicians have argued that Taiwan’s exclusion from the WHO meetings and collaborations led to an inferior response that led to
Taiwanese casualties and infections (Cyranoski, 2003; TIME, 2017). However, Taiwan
had since argued to learn from the lessons of SARS and to come up with effective and
efficient strategies for coping with similar outbreaks, as is evident in the country’s relative success in limiting the impact of COVID-19 (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic
of China [Taiwan], 2020; Reuters, 2020a). In light of COVID-19, the call to include
Taiwan in the WHO resurfaced, yet it was met with Chinese resistance (Reuters, 2020a),
as China believes that such inclusion in the WHO would be interpreted as legitimizing
Taiwan’s plead for independence and sovereignty (Wang, 2000).
In light of that historic background, and at the early days of COVID-19, on 10
February 2020, a Taiwanese YouTuber, Ray Du, produced a video, titled An Open Letter
to the WHO, calling for international attention to Taiwan’s absence from the WHO and
the global fight against COVID-19. By that time the video was published, Ray Du had
already gained massive online following for his YouTube English-spoken channel, established in January 2015, making him a local celebrity (Huang, 2020a). He obtained over
one million subscriptions in the first couple of years of his channel’s existence and surpassed two million subscriptions by January 2019 (Huang, 2020a).
The video that promotes Taiwan’s bid to enter the WHO was disseminated over social
media, including Twitter (Everington, 2020), and soon went viral. As of November 2020,
the video received almost one-and-a-half million views on YouTube (Du, 2020, available
at https://youtu.be/hpxfdAAD4g4). The video is 3:08 minutes long and features Ray Du
talking in English (accompanied by English and Chinese subtitles) with an instrumental
music in the background, and at times images of Taiwan and Taiwanese health officials
and doctors. At the beginning, Ray approaches “the Internet” in English, introducing
himself as a YouTuber from Taiwan, and then reading his open letter to the WHO. He
argues that many have called for the inclusion of Taiwan in the WHO. He claims that
since the outbreak of COVID-19, leaders around the world had been calling the WHO to
allow Taiwan membership, or at least observer status, in the WHO. He explains that
inclusion in the WHO will be of benefit not only to Taiwan but to the world, saying, “a
concerted, global efforts is the only way to ensure the health and welfare of everyone,”
adding that “excluding Taiwan could make it a blind spot in the international response to

3220

new media & society 26(6)

the disease.” Ray compares the situation with the 2003 SARS outbreak, arguing that
Taiwan was deprived of crucial knowledge that could have save lives.
In the second half of the video, Ray claim that Taiwan is “not playing the victim here.
Taiwan can help!” detailing that the Taiwanese health care system is lauded as one of the
best in the world and their inclusion could bring knowledge and experience from fighting
diseases like SARS, Ebola, and other pandemics. Ray evokes both local and global identities by pleading that “as a Taiwanese, and a member of the global community, I’m asking you on behalf of the world to include Taiwan.” He claims the inclusion will fit the
WHO’s agenda of health as a human right and health for all without exception.
At the epilogue to the video, a text appears on a black screen, indicating that the
objective of the WHO is the attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of
health (WHO, 1946). Then, Ray employs hashtag activism by writing, “Leave no one
behind. Share this video with the hashtag #TWforWHO.” In sum, the original YouTube
video that launched the campaign promoted a multilayered message, pointing both to the
Chinese abuse of political power and to Taiwan’s ability to contribute to the global efforts
to fight COVID-19.
About 2 months later, on 14 April 2020, Ray and others have published an advertisement for the hashtag campaign in the American newspaper the NYT (Huang, 2020b).
The crowdfunded ad was published weeks after the WHO chief Dr. Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus argued publicly that he received racist messages and death threats originating in Taiwan (Feuer, 2020). The message of the NYT ad differed from the original
YouTube in important ways. While the YouTube message emphasized China’s abuse of
political power, the full-page advertisement titled “WHO Can Help? Taiwan,” focused
exclusively on Taiwan’s ability to contribute to the global efforts against COVID-19. In
fact, the word China does not appear in the ad. Accordingly, the NYT ad also introduced
a second hashtag, #TaiwanCanHelp, that emphasizes the detrimental impact that Taiwan’s
exclusion from the WHO has on the rest of the world. The advertisement concluded with
a call to action:
In a time of isolation, we choose solidarity . . . You are not alone. Taiwan is with you . . . We
know what you are going through. We know how hard it is . . . Who can isolate Taiwan? No
one. Because we are here to help #TaiwanCanHelp.

Hashtag activism at times of global calamity
Existing theories of hashtag activism were developed primarily around the contexts of
gender relations (Clark, 2019; Jackson et al., 2020) and domestic conflicts (Freelon
et al., 2016; González-Bailón et al., 2013). However, we argue that the campaign to promote Taiwan’s inclusion in the WHO during COVID-19 cannot be fully understood
within the boundaries of existing conceptualizations of hashtag activism (Clark, 2016;
Freelon et al., 2016; Kilgo et al., 2018), due to two reasons. First, as opposed to #MeToo
and #BlackLivesMatter, the #TWforWHO/#TaiwanCanHelp campaign is unique in
terms of the ways its organizers have framed power relations and the call for help.
Specifically, the campaign framed Taiwan both as a passive victim and as an active alley.
On one hand, Ray Du in his YouTube video and NYT ad portrayed Taiwan as

Liu et al.

3221

marginalized in terms of political power and positioned the more dominant China as the
oppressor that prevents Taiwan from joining the UN and the WHO. But at the same time,
the Taiwanese campaign, as evident in the hashtags chosen, also argued that Taiwan
could offer a superior support to the global efforts against COVID-19 due to its success
in implementing the lessons from prior outbreaks and containing the disease in its territory. Thus, this case presents a unique campaign discourse that extends the meaning of
coalition building (Clark, 2019) using Hashtag activism (Jackson et al., 2020). The campaign therefore is expected to attempt to explain not only how the marginalized group is
being oppressed but also how that oppression, and hence exclusion, can harm dominant,
core countries. If that is the case, online collaboration could be seen as a way to develop
mutually beneficial coalition that points to the harmful impact of oppression on both the
minority and majority groups, often referred to in the context of international relations
and world systems theories as periphery and core countries (Chang, 1998; Wallerstein,
1974). We therefore expected some of the discourse around the campaign to focus not
only on the Chinese oppression but also on Taiwan’s ability and potential to help the fight
against the pandemic.
Second, the Taiwanese hashtag activism campaign took place in the context of an
unprecedented global health crisis. Most people learn about public crises (Lachlan et al.,
2014) such as epidemics from the mass (Ophir, 2018) and social (Chan et al., 2018;
Oyeyemi et al., 2014) media. Like other public health crises, epidemics have the potential
to do massive physical, psychological, and social harm (Reynolds and Seeger, 2005). At
times of uncertainty, people seek information that would help them to make sense of the
crisis (Weick, 1988). In the context of constantly developing epidemic outbreaks (Coombs,
1999), the public needs to learn about particular health and social risks, and ways health
institutions and individuals can act to ameliorate risks (Dahlstrom et al., 2012; Sellnow
and Seeger, 2013). Social media provide accessible information, both from experts and
from fellow citizens (Young et al., 2018). As the #TaiwanCanHelp campaign occurred
during the height of the COVID-19 outbreak, we expect social media users to discuss the
health and social threats of the disease. More importantly, as campaign organizers sought
to emphasize Taiwan’s ability to cope with the disease and to support global efforts to
fight the epidemic, we expect a particular attention to be given in hashtag-related activity
to efficacy information, that is, information promoting the notion that Taiwan is able to
take specific actions to successfully ameliorate risks (Bandura, 1990).
In sum, our exploratory analysis of the Taiwanese campaign relies on prior findings
from studies on hashtag activism. However, due to the unique tactic employed by Du and
the campaign organizers, we expected the discourse around the hashtags to potentially
include information about Taiwan’s efficacy and its ability to contribute to the global
efforts against COVID-19. We asked,
RQ1. What were the frames employed by social media users posting on the
#TWforWHO hashtag campaign?
As argued earlier, the Taiwanese campaign emphasized the potential of Taiwan to
support the WHO and the rest of the world. This stating point is markedly different from

3222

new media & society 26(6)

the one promoted by Black Lives Matter and the Me Too movement. While this perspective was presented in the original YouTube video, along with accusations of political
abuse by China, it was the sole focus of the NYT ad. We therefore asked:
RQ2. Did the introduction of a new hashtag in the NYT change the conversation in
terms of framing?

Method
Data collection
The campaign for Taiwan’s inclusion in the WHO used two hashtags, #TWforWHO
(promoted on YouTube) and #TaiwanCanHelp. In total, 170,191 tweets posted between
1 February and 31 October 20201 were collected via Brandwatch (www.Brandwatch.
com). Since the campaign was directed toward the global community, and to keep our
model stable and consistent, we omitted tweets not in English (identified via Google’s
CLD2 algorithm). Importantly, that resulted in the omission of only 6315 tweets, leaving
a total of 163,876 English language tweets for analysis. Additional preprocessing was
then performed. First, extremely short texts containing little information (defined as less
than 10 characters, which on average equals to less than two words) were removed (this
included only 13 tweets). Then, for model estimation purposes only, duplicated tweets
were removed, reducing the sample to 28,324. This is expected in a social media environment such as Twitter where singular messages tend to propagate via copying and
retweeting and these duplicated tweets were re-added to sample after model estimation
to correctly calculate the volume of activity and topic prominence.
In addition, following these steps, texts were preprocessed by removing stop-words
and the specific search terms used to retrieve the content, converting capital letters to
lowercase, removing punctuations and numbers, and removing words that appeared in
more than 90% of the documents, or in less than 0.01%, based on guidelines suggested
by Maier et al. (2018). We refrained from lemmatization or stemming due to its possible
negative influence on topic stability (Schofield et al., 2017).

Topic model networks
The thematic analysis of tweets relied on the Analysis of Topic Model Networks
(ANTMN) approach (Walter and Ophir, 2019). ANTMN is a three-step approach, consisting of modeling a topic model, calculating a network of topics based on their cooccurrence in documents (here tweets), and clustering topics into themes using
community detection algorithms. We detail each step next and provide the code for the
full analysis in the authors’ GitHub page (https://github.com/ophiryotam).
Topic modeling is a semi-automated, unsupervised method for the analysis of textual
content (Blei et al., 2003). Topic models use a Bayesian generative approach, in which
the model attempts to “mimic” the writing process of a given corpus of documents (Blei
et al., 2003). In other words, the algorithm extracts a set of topics from which the given
corpus could have been created. “Topics” are statistical entities, sets of frequency

Liu et al.

3223

distributions of words, based on the linguistic assumption of co-occurrence, that is, that
words that are being used more frequently in the same documents also associate thematically. In topic models, every word in the corpus has a probability of appearing in each of
the topics and every document is composed as a mixture of all topics (Grimmer and
Stewart, 2013). Topic modeling is a “bag-of-words” approach, which means that narrative, location in the text, and syntax are not taken into consideration (Wallach, 2006).
In this work, we use latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and Gibbs Sampling (LDA,
see Blei et al., 2003). To assess the optimal number of topics, to for parameter optimization, we estimated a wide range of models containing 5 to 100 topics by “skips” of
5 with varying alpha levels (with values being .01, .05, .1, .2, and .5). Based on the fit
indicator of perplexity (Walter, Ophir, & Jamieson, 2020), we chose of model of 35
topics with alpha value of .05.
To interpret the topics, we examined three types of information: the words with the
highest loading over each topic, the words that are both prevalent and exclusive to each
topic (see definition and formula of frequency exclusivity (FREX) words in Roberts
et al., 2014), and the full documents that are most representative of each topic. Topics
were labeled by both the main and second author. Finally, as mentioned earlier, after topics were estimated and labeled, the 135,526 duplicated tweets were added back to the
corpus and noted for their topical mixture.
Network of topics was calculated using pairwise cosine similarity between topics
based on the documents they share. In other words, topics were deemed more similar, the
more they tended to co-occur. As mentioned earlier, each document is a mixture of topics. The information regarding this mixture is described by the theta matrix, in which
columns represent the various topics and the rows represent the documents (Maier et al.,
2018). To cluster topics into themes, we used the theta matrix to calculate the distance/
similarity between each pair of topics—estimating the extent to which topics tend to
appear in the same documents. The result is a fully connected, undirected, and weighted
network, where edges provide information on the extent to which topics are related
(Walter and Ophir, 2019). Finally, for community structure detection or frame identification (with frames defined as clusters of co-occurring topics), we utilized the method
based on the Leading Eigenvector of the Community Matrix algorithm (Newman, 2006).
The results of the frame analysis can be found in Figure 1.

Results
To examine the thematic content of the campaign (RQ1), we identified 35 topics of discussion that were clustered into three frames. Based on a close qualitative reading of the
texts and topics representative of each cluster, we labeled the frames containment, geopolitical, and international cooperation. For readers’ convenience, we provide a table
with the most representative words and tweets for each topic in Online Appendix 1.
Figure 1 presents the topics network.
The first frame, which was labeled containment (blue topics in Figure 1), consisted of
topics discussing the ways Taiwan was able to effectively fight the spread of COVID-19.
Topics in this frame emphasized the relatively normal life Taiwan had managed to allow
its citizens by effectively keeping the number of cases and deaths low. Topics also

3224

new media & society 26(6)

Figure 1. A map of the topics network generated via ANTMN. The color of nodes indicates
the community (frame) associated with each topic. Size of nodes indicates topic prominence in
the complete corpus.

detailed specific measures used by Taiwan to slow the spread of COVID-19, from the
development of test kits to mandatory mask rules. Taiwan’s success in containing
COVID-19 is exemplified by a topic dedicated to the renewal of baseball games in the
country, at a time when many countries around the globe struggled to resume sports and
cultural events due to high infection and death numbers. By focusing on Taiwanese strategies and innovations, the frame posits Taiwan, the otherwise-periphery country in
power struggles with China, in an empowered position. Simply put, while the main argument of the hashtag campaign was to shed light on China’s oppression of Taiwan, the
containment frame emphasized Taiwan’s potential to benefit core countries and the
global fight against COVID-19. Support in the campaign, in that regard, was framed as
an effort to build a mutually beneficial coalition.
The second frame, geopolitics (gray), emphasized the accusations against China’s
abuse of political power, claiming Taiwan’s exclusion is incongruent with their relative
success in blocking the spread of COVID-19. Topics in this frame explained the historical context of Taiwan’s claim for independence. Users employing the frame often
attacked China for its oppressive behavior toward countries like Taiwan, but also Hong
Kong, and calling for a recognition in the Taiwan’s sovereignty and independence from
China. To support the claim that the exclusion of Taiwan was based solely on geopolitics
and not on its inability to contribute to the global efforts against the epidemic,

Liu et al.

3225

some topics in this frame emphasized Taiwan’s low case count and the relative safety it
provides its citizens during COVID-19. Another set of topics emphasize the goal of the
WHO, to further support the argument that the exclusion of Taiwan contradicted the
organization’s purpose and aims.
The third frame, International Cooperation (red), consisted of topics that emphasized
the need for international cooperation to fight global health risks such as epidemics. In
that sense, while the containment frame included a topic about Taiwan’s mandatory mask
ruling, the cooperation frame focused on Taiwan’s ability to donate masks to other countries. A similar topic associated with the International Cooperation frame focused on
Taiwan’s ability to donate medical supplies to other countries in need. Yet, another topic
suggested adopting Taiwan’s masks-monitoring system (one that indicates to citizens
where masks are currently available for purchase) abroad. Topics such as Partnership
with Taiwan further endorsed the argument that public health threats such as epidemics
require an efficient and effective global cooperation, one where Taiwan could play a key
role in. In that context, topics in this frame portrayed Taiwan not only as a country in
need for empathy and support but as an active, able ally. Like other hashtag activism
campaigns, this one called for coalition building, but one that was imagined as mutually
beneficial and put the empowerment of oppressed groups at its core.
Next, we examined how the campaign evolved over time in terms of volume and
relative use of frames, with a particular focus on the discourse before and after the
NYT ad (RQ2). In terms of volume, as can be seen in Figure 2, the earliest activity
occurred after the YouTube video was uploaded in two subsequent spikes. The following spikes in activity could be seen during April 2020, following the NYT ad. The
vast majority of activity took place between February and May 2020. After that, activity was minimal, except for a small spike during September 2020, in light of the UN’s
75 General Assembly on 15 September. Before the UN meeting, a huge ‘Taiwan can
help” sign was hanged in Times Square in New York City, where the meeting took
place (Taiwan News, 2020).
In terms of frames, the initial spike in February was dominated by discussion of geopolitics. Most focus at that point was given to accusing China, with little attention given
to the containment and international cooperation frames. In that regard, activity early
followed the model of hashtag activism that was found in prior work on Black Lives
Matter and Me Too, where the main focus is on the oppression of minorities (Taiwan) by
dominant actors (China). However, the NYT ad marked a turning point, not only in terms
of the volume that increased dramatically but also in framing.
As can be seen in Figure 2, following the NYT ad, discourse had shifted to focusing
on the need for international cooperation and Taiwan’s success story. Changes in framing
followed external events. For example, we identify a rise in geopolitics framing following news reports about the WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus who said he had
been subjected to racist comments and death threats from Taiwanese and their supporters
(Feuer, 2020). In mid-April, there was a rise in discussion of international cooperation,
following Ray Du’s efforts to crowdfund an NYT ad (Cheung, 2020).
As expected, following the NYT ad’s publication on 14 April, discourse online had
shifted away from geopolitics into a discussion of Taiwan’s ability to support the global
war against COVID-19. As our data show (Figure 2), the ad dramatically, if temporarily,

3226

new media & society 26(6)

Figure 2. Volume and frame prominence over time. The dashed vertical lines represent the
original YouTube video (left) and the NYT ad (right).

increased the use of the international cooperation frame on the expense of the otherwise
dominant geopolitics and containment frames.
In sum, as can be seen in Figure 2, most activity took place around Ray Du’s promotion activities, first in his YouTube video and then in his crowdfunded ad at the NYT. The
figure suggests that while framing responded at times to ongoing events (e.g. the allegations of racist remarks against the WHO chief), it largely corresponded to the tone of the
campaign. when Ray Du’s video emphasized the Chinese effort to prevent Taiwan from
joining in, using the hashtag #TWforWHO, most Twitter activity focused on geopolitics.
But when the second stage of the campaign was launched with the NYT ad and the additional hashtag, #TaiwanCanHelp, that more directly emphasized Taiwan’s efficacy, the
discourse moved to a discussion of the need for international cooperation.

Discussion
Through the affordances of the Internet, hashtag activism aims to empower oppressed
groups who challenge social injustices. Recently, researchers have broadened the
scholarly perspective on hashtag activism to include its application in international
conflicts (Zeitzoff, 2018). Through this strategy, activists belonging to groups of traditionally limited cultural power can amplify their voices in a communication environment that is more egalitarian in nature than the mass media (Gabel et al., 2020). The

Liu et al.

3227

lack of communication opportunities had been seen by scholars as a barrier for weaker
international players in participatory democratic structures (Young, 1989), and enlarging the scope of the conflict via media—a possible remedy (Gamson and Wolfsfeld,
1993). Thus, the affordances of social media allow the introduction of peripheral countries into discussions that were traditionally dominated by core countries only
(Himelboim, 2010). In this way, communication messages that are calling for digital
allyship across traditional core–periphery lines can challenge dichotomous power relations of oppressed and oppressors. Such allyship across uneven geopolitical positions
may allow periphery countries to align with powerful allies, not as victims in seek of
recognition but as contributing allies.
Specifically, this study builds upon the theoretical perspective of hashtag activism
(Jackson et al., 2020) as a form of international allyship, to examine framing devices
used in hashtag-driven tweets. Using a computational method for the analysis of big
textual data, we show that the campaign was used to both promote the message itself
(i.e. increase the messages’ reach) and emphasize the importance of Taiwan to the
global fight against COVID-19 as well as China’s abuse of political power and oppression of Taiwan. Our analysis of the dynamics of framing suggests that the move from
a discourse emphasizing victimhood and oppression to one of empowerment and
global cooperation was fueled by the introduction of the second hashtag,
#TaiwanCanHelp, in the prominent NYT ad.
Our data demonstrate how hashtag activism served multiple purposes as the campaign
developed. The geopolitics frame described the ways China arguably abused its international power to exclude Taiwan from global organizations (similar to #MeToo and
#BlackLivesMatter’s messages of systematic oppression). This frame particularly shed
light on China’s oppressive relationship with the country and how it resulted in detrimental health effects for Taiwan and its people, for example, during the 2003 SARS outbreak. However, the containment frame described how Taiwan has efficiently slowed
down the spread of the virus, emphasizing Taiwan’s exceptional public health system,
innovations, and production capabilities (e.g. mask production and the development of
monitoring and testing equipment). Finally, the international cooperation frame complemented this argument by emphasizing how Taiwan’s capabilities could help slow down
COVID-19 worldwide, what we described as a novel theoretical concept of mutually
beneficial coalition building, one that simultaneously points to the detrimental impact of
oppression on both the oppressed and the rest of the world.
We show how the Taiwanese campaign for its inclusion in the WHO used a second
hashtag, promoted via an advertisement in an American prestige newspaper, to reframe
Taiwan’s place in the global war against COVID-19. While the Taiwanese activists began
their campaign by following the oppressed strategy adopted by #BlackLivesMatter and
#MeToo, and at first emphasized its oppression by China, the introduction of the
#TaiwanCanHelp hashtag attempted to situate Taiwan as an equally capable actor in
international cooperation. Prior research has shown how periphery and core countries
often negotiate the meaning of conflicts by using competing hashtags. Despite the
affordances of social media, hashtag activism poses challenges to communicators as
these discursive conflicts still take place in asymmetrical environments (see the use of
the two competing hashtags, #IsraelUnderAttack and #GazaUnderAttack in Zeitzoff,

3228

new media & society 26(6)

2018). This differential power during geopolitical conflicts further demonstrates peripheral actors’ need for allyship by Western powers. Our results show how the Taiwanese
campaign attempted to create a unique rhetorical opportunity to gain a foothold in international organizations and gain said allyship by harnessing the global nature of a public
health crisis (Reynolds and Seeger, 2005). Importantly, like in prior international conflicts, this effort was done in English (Jost et al., 2018) on Twitter, a contemporary global
public sphere (Guo et al., 2019) with the capacity to attract Western attention, and one
that was used extensively in the past during epidemics, both by elites and by laypersons
(Petersen and Gerken, 2021; Stella et al., 2020).
COVID-19 erupted at a time of contention between two global forces, the West, and
particularly Donald Trump’s America, and China (Liu and Woo, 2018). We argue that the
campaign was thus seen by its creators as an opportunity to strengthen the neocolonial
bond between the United States and the Taiwanese subempire (Chen, 2010), one that had
been developing for decades as Taiwan adopted more characteristics of Western capitalism and modernity. Such opportunities are particularly important in light of Western
countries’ inability to conduct official relationship with Taiwan (Barrett, 2019; Wang,
2000) due to the One China principle (US Department of State, 2018). In other words,
the campaign used the devastating COVID-19 global outbreak and Taiwan’s relative success as slowing the virus down, to emphasize the political tensions and discrimination
that prevented Taiwan from joining the UN and WHO.
In sum, our study extends the current understanding of hashtag activism, by demonstrating the multifaceted nature of hashtag activism in the intersection of health, science,
and geopolitics. Our results show that the attempt to create a more balanced power relationship between politically oppressed groups and those in power was achieved in this
campaign through a dynamic use of complementary frames that emphasized both
Taiwan’s oppression by China and its need for Western allyships, and simultaneously,
Taiwan’s ability to contribute to the global efforts and thus help other countries. We
argue that the combination of empathy and efficacy in the campaign’s messages advocated for the construction of what we named a mutually beneficial coalition against an
abuse of political power (Clark, 2019; Jackson et al., 2020) while claiming that the detrimental effects of oppression influence both the periphery (Taiwan) and core (the West)
groups (Chang, 1998; Wallerstein, 1974).

Limitations
There are several limitations to the current study. First, the study had focused on only
one campaign that was relatively contained in scope. The call to include Taiwan in the
WHO’s COVID-19 efforts never evolved into a full blown, lasting social movement
like BLM or #MeToo. As opposed to studies focusing on these movements, our analysis is limited to the specific online campaign around the hashtags. Second, our analysis of content cannot teach us on the actual effects of the messages or the hashtags.
Additional studies focused on audience reception could further develop our understanding of the impact of the campaign. Third, the study focuses on the content of
messages only and not on propagation. Future studies with the data would be able to
examine the spread of the campaign and the social actors who promoted and help

Liu et al.

3229

spread it. Fourth, our analysis was limited to social media, and Twitter specifically.
Although the second ad by Ray Du was published in the NYT, it was presented as an
advertising and not as an article or editorial. Future studies may examine the coverage
the campaign received on mainstream and news media and examine its impact on the
campaign. Nevertheless, the choice of Twitter for our study was based on its heavy
reliance on hashtags due to its characters limit, as well as the fact that the Taiwanese
campaign explicitly called for users to disseminate the hashtag over Twitter (in a
pinned comment on the original YouTube’s video). Fifth, our analysis followed existing methodological approaches, namely, the multistage ANTMN approach (Walter
and Ophir, 2019). While the method is useful at removing researchers’ bias through a
reliance on an unsupervised approach, we acknowledge that some decisions are still
made by the researchers, such as the choice of a community detection algorithm for
interpretation (Ophir et al., 2020). Finally, to keep our model stable and consistent,
our analysis focused only on tweets in English. In this case, since the campaign was
directed toward global public opinion, more than 99% of tweets were in English and
only a few were omitted. However, it may overlook other languages that are used to
echo #TaiwanCanHelp. Further research could address questions about how users of
different languages frame this campaign by adding to or taking away from the strength
of this argument. For example, traditional Chinese users, such as Taiwanese, may
formalize this significant international bid, while simplified Chinese users may see it
as common issues.
Nevertheless, our study demonstrates how hashtag activism provided a space for
Taiwanese and other social media users to spread the word of Ray’s video and the NYT
ad. We examine the discourse around the hashtags that allowed grassroots activists to
build international bridges of cooperation during a time when such a bridge was most
needed—one of a global public health crisis. Its results show that the call for help combined emotional needs (e.g. patriotism) with political messaging (discussing the political force of China over the UN and the WHO) and practical information (promoting
Taiwan’s ability to contribute to the global effort by emphasizing Taiwanese innovation
and public health infrastructure). This study helps further develop the theory of hashtag
activism and demonstrate its ability to establish new mechanisms of dialogue, negotiation, and influences across cultures and spaces, during a time of an international peril.
The Taiwanese campaign studied here serves as an example of hashtag activism that
embraces, but also extends narratives of victimhood and oppression, into ones emphasizing empowerment of oppressed groups, and the coalition building of a mutually beneficial allyship that is crucial at times of global calamities.
Acknowledgement
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers and the editors for their insightful comments
and suggestions.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

3230

new media & society 26(6)

ORCID iDs
Anita KC Liu

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1341-1127

Dror Walter

https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9870-998X

Supplemental material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.

Note
1.

Due to a technical glitch, we could not obtain the data for 1 May 2020. We do not believe that
the missing day would influence or change the conclusion of analyses.

References
Bandura A (1990) Evaluation of AIDS prevention and education programs: perceived self-efficacy
in the exercise of control over AIDS infection. Evaluation and Program Planning 13(1):
9–17.
Banet-Weiser S (2015) Keynote address: media, markets, gender: economies of visibility in a
neoliberal moment. The Communication Review 18(1): 53–70.
Barrett GRB (2019) Between sovereignty and legitimacy: China and UNESCO, 1946-1953
(Modern Asian Studies). Available at: https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:3a2fa3db-4d1b468d-b4c3-5b90455208b7
BBC News (2020) Why Taiwan has become a problem for WHO. BBC News, 30 March. Available
at: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-52088167
Blanchard B and Nebehay S (2020) U.S. Clashes with China over Taiwan’s Place at the WHO
Table. Reuters. Available at: https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN2000GE
Blei DM, Ng AY and Jordan MI (2003) Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 3: 993–1022.
Bush RC (2017) A One-China policy primer. East Asia Policy Paper 10: 1–30.
Bush RC (2013) Uncharted Strait: The Future of China-Taiwan Relations. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution Press.
Chan MS, Winneg K, Hawkins L, et al. (2018) Legacy and social media respectively influence risk
perceptions and protective behaviors during emerging health threats: a multi-wave analysis of
communications on Zika virus cases. Social Science & Medicine 212: 50–59.
Chang T (1998) All countries not created equal to be news: world system and international communication. Communication Research 25: 528–563.
Chen KH (2010) Asia as Method: Toward Deimperialization. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Chen KW (2008) Disciplining Taiwan: the Kuomintang’s methods of control during the White
Terror Era (1947-1987). Taiwan International Studies Quarterly 4(4): 185–210.
Cheung H (2020) The NT$4 million question. Taipei Times, 16 April. Available at: https://www.
taipeitimes.com/News/feat/archives/2020/04/16/2003734699
Ching N (2020) US supports Taiwan’s world health assembly observer status. Voice of America
(VOA), 30 March. Available at: https://www.insidevoa.com/p/5831.html
Clark MD (2019) White folks’ work: digital allyship praxis in the #BlackLivesMatter movement.
Social Movement Studies 18(5): 519–534.
Clark R (2016) “Hope in a hashtag”: the discursive activism of #WhyIStayed. Feminist Media
Studies 16(5): 788–804.

Liu et al.

3231

Clark-Parsons R (2021) “I see you, I believe you, I stand with you”: #MeToo and the performance
of networked feminist visibility. Feminist Media Studies 21(3): 362–380.
Coombs TW (1999) Ongoing Crisis Communication: Planning, Managing, and Responding.
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Cullather N (1996) “Fuel for the Good Dragon”: the United States and industrial policy in Taiwan,
1950–1965. Diplomatic History 20(1): 1–26.
Cyranoski D (2003) Taiwan left isolated in fight against SARS. Nature 422(6933): 652–652.
Dahlstrom MF, Dudo A and Brossard D (2012) Precision of information, sensational information, and self-efficacy information as message-level variables affecting risk perceptions. Risk
Analysis 32(1): 155–166.
Duara P (ed.) (2004) Decolonization: Perspectives from Now and Then. London: Routledge.
Duncombe C (2017) Twitter and transformative diplomacy: social media and Iran–US relations.
International Affairs 93(3): 545–562.
Ellcessor E (2018) “One tweet to make so much noise”: connected celebrity activism in the case
of Marlee Matlin. New Media & Society 20(1): 255–271.
Everington K (2020) Taiwanese YouTuber posts open letter to WHO. Taiwan News, 11 February.
Available at: https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/3874539
Fell D (2006) Party Politics in Taiwan: Party Change and the Democratic Evolution of Taiwan,
1991-2004. London: Routledge.
Feuer W (2020) WHO chief addresses death threats, racist insults: “I don’t give a damn.” CNBC,
8 April. Available at: https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/08/who-chief-addresses-death-threatsracist-insults-i-dont-give-a-damn.html
Freelon D, McIlwain C and Clark M (2018) Quantifying the power and consequences of social
media protest. New Media and Society 20(3): 990–1011.
Gabel S, Reichert L and Reuter C (2020) Discussing conflict in social media: the use of Twitter in
the Jammu and Kashmir conflict. Media, War & Conflict. Epub ahead of print 10 December.
DOI: 10.1177/1750635220970997.
Gamson WA and Wolfsfeld G (1993) Movements and media as interacting systems. The ANNALS
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 528(1): 114–125.
Gitlin T (1980) The Whole World Is Watching: Mass Media in the Making & Unmaking of the New
Left. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
González-Bailón S, Borge-Holthoefer J and Moreno Y (2013) Broadcasters and hidden influentials in online protest diffusion. American Behavioral Scientist 57(7): 943–965.
González-Bailón S, Borge-Holthoefer J, Rivero A, et al. (2011) The dynamics of protest recruitment through an online network. Scientific Reports 1(1): 197.
Grimmer J and Stewart BM (2013) Text as data: the promise and pitfalls of automatic content
analysis methods for political texts. Political Analysis 21(3): 267–297.
Guo L, Mays K and Wang J (2019) Whose story wins on Twitter? Visualizing the South China Sea
dispute. Journalism Studies 20(4): 563–584.
Hickson CE (2003) Taiwan in International Organizations: Internationalization of the Taiwan–
China Relationship. The Atlantic Council of the United States.
Himelboim I (2010) The international network structure of news media: an analysis of hyperlinks
usage in news web sites. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 54(3): 373–390.
Hsieh Y-H, Chen CWS and Hsu S-B (2004) SARS outbreak, Taiwan, 2003. Emerging Infectious
Diseases 10(2): 201–206.
Huang Y-C (2020a) 阿滴：為了賺錢當 YouTuber, 你會失望｜天下雜誌. 天下雜誌. Available
at: https://www.cw.com.tw/article/5099472
Huang T-T (2020b) WHO denies isolation claim in NYT “Taiwan can help” ad. Taiwan News, 15
April. Available at: https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/3916467

3232

new media & society 26(6)

Jackson SJ, Bailey M and Welles BF (2020) #HashtagActivism. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Available at: https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/hashtagactivism
Jost JT, Barberá P, Bonneau R, et al. (2018) How social media facilitates political protest: information, motivation, and social networks. Political Psychology 39: 85–118.
Kilgo DK, Harlow S, García-Perdomo V, et al. (2018) From #Ferguson to #Ayotzinapa: analyzing differences in domestic and Foreign protest news shared on social media. Mass
Communication and Society 21(5): 606–630.
Kilgo DK, Yoo J and Johnson TJ (2019) Spreading Ebola panic: newspaper and social media coverage of the 2014 Ebola health crisis. Health Communication 34(8): 811–817.
Kuo R (2018) Racial justice activist hashtags: counterpublics and discourse circulation. New
Media & Society 20: 495–514.
Lachlan KA, Spence PR, Lin X, et al. (2014) Screaming into the wind: examining the volume and
content of tweets associated with hurricane sandy. Communication Studies 65(5): 500–518.
Levine-Rasky C and Ghaffar-Siddiqui S (2020) White allyship means a transfer of power. Contexts
19(4): 79–81.
Lin CN (2020) Virus fears: Canada and Japan endorse WHO bid. Taipei Times, 31 January.
Available at: http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2020/01/31/2003730096
Liu T and Woo WT (2018) Understanding the US-China trade war. China Economic Journal
11(3): 319–340.
McLeod DM and Shah DV (2015) News Frames and National Security: Covering Big Brother.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maier D, Waldherr A, Miltner P, et al. (2018) Applying LDA topic modeling in communication
research: toward a valid and reliable methodology. Communication Methods and Measures
12(2–3): 93–118.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of China (Taiwan) (2020) Taiwan to continue campaign
for UN participation. Taiwan Today, 31 August. Available at: https://taiwantoday.tw/news.
php?unit=2&post=184276
Mustafaraj E, Finn S, Whitlock C, et al. (2011) Vocal minority versus silent majority: discovering the opinions of the long tail. In: 2011 IEEE third international conference on privacy,
security, risk and trust and 2011 IEEE third international conference on social computing, Boston, MA, 9–11 October, pp. 103–110. New York: IEEE. Available at: https://doi.
org/10.1109/PASSAT/SocialCom.2011.188
Newman ME (2006) Finding community structure in networks using the eigenvectors of matrices.
Physical Review E 74(3): 036104.
Ophir Y (2018) Coverage of epidemics in American Newspapers through the lens of the crisis and
emergency risk communication framework. Health Security 16(3): 147–157.
Ophir Y, Walter D and Marchant ER (2020) A collaborative way of knowing: bridging computational communication research and grounded theory ethnography. Journal of Communication
70(3): 447–472.
Oyeyemi SO, Gabarron E and Wynn R (2014) Ebola, Twitter, and misinformation: a dangerous
combination? British Medical Journal 349: g6178.
Petersen K and Gerken JM (2021) #Covid-19: an exploratory investigation of hashtag usage on
Twitter. Health Policy 125(4): 541–547.
Qi D (2012) Divergent popular support for the DPP and the Taiwan independence movement,
2000–2012. Journal of Contemporary China 21(78): 973–991.
Ray Du English (2020, February 10) An open letter to the World Health Organization (from TAIWAN)
[Video]. YouTube. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hpxfdAAD4g4
Reuters (2020a) China Says Taiwan Will Fail in Bid to Attend Key WHO Meeting. Reuters.
Available at: https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSL4N2CQ26I

Liu et al.

3233

Reuters (2020c) WHO Says Has “No Mandate” to Invite Taiwan to Assembly Meeting. Reuters.
Available at: https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN22N29B
Reynolds B and Seeger MW (2005) Crisis and emergency risk communication as an integrative
model. Journal of Health Communication 10(1): 43–55.
Roberts ME, Stewart BM, Tingley D, et al. (2014) Structural topic models for Open-Ended Survey
responses. American Journal of Political Science 58(4): 1064–1082.
Rufai SR and Bunce C (2020) World leaders’ usage of Twitter in response to the COVID-19 pandemic: a content analysis. Journal of Public Health 42(3): 510–516.
Schifrin N (2020) Taiwan’s aggressive efforts are paying off in fight against COVID-19. PBS
NewsHour, 1 April. Available at: https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/taiwans-aggressiveefforts-are-paying-off-in-fight-against-covid-19
Schofield A, Thompson L and Mimno D (2017) Quantifying the effects of text duplication on
semantic models. In: Proceedings of the 2017 conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing, Copenhagen , Denmark, 7–11 September, pp. 2737–2747. Association
for Computational Linguistics. Available at: https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1290
Sellnow TL and Seeger MW (2013) Theorizing Crisis Communication. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons.
Stella M, Restocchi V and De Deyne S (2020) #lockdown: network-enhanced emotional profiling
in the time of Covid-19. Big Data and Cognitive Computing 4(2): 14.
Su S-F and Han Y-Y (2020) How Taiwan, a non-WHO member, takes actions in response to
COVID-19. Journal of Global Health 10(1): 010380.
Taiwan News (2020) Huge “Taiwan can help” ads appear in New York’s Times Square. Taiwan
News, 17 September. Available at: https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/4010940
The New York Times (2020) Covid world map: tracking the global outbreak. The New York Times,
30 April. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/world/coronavirus-maps.
html#countries
TIME (2017) Taiwan’s vice president on SARS, Global Health and China. TIME, 18 May.
Available at: https://time.com/4783772/taiwan-health-who-wha-china/
US Department of State (2018) U.S. relations with Taiwan. U.S. Department of State. Available
at: https://www.state.gov/u-s-relations-with-taiwan/
Wallach HM (2006) Topic modeling: beyond bag-of-words. In: Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on machine learning, Pittsburgh, PA, 25–29 June, pp. 977–984. New York:
ACM. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/1143844.1143967
Wallerstein I (1974) The modern world-system: capitalist agriculture and the origins of the
European world-economy in the sixteenth century. The American Historical Review 80:
1323–1324.
Walter D and Ophir Y (2019) News frame analysis: an inductive mixed-method computational
approach. Communication Methods and Measures 13(4): 248–266.
Walter, D., Ophir, Y., & Jamieson, K. H. (2020). Russian Twitter accounts and the partisan polarization of vaccine discourse, 2015–2017. American Journal of Public Health, 110(5), 718–
724. https://doi.org/ 10.2105/AJPH.2019.305564
Wang TY (2000) “One China, one Taiwan”: an analysis of the democratic progressive party’s
China policy. Journal of Asian and African Studies 35(1): 159–182.
Weick KE (1988) Enacted sensemaking in crisis situations. Journal of Management Studies 25(4):
305–317.
Wonneberger A, Hellsten IR and Jacobs SH (2021) Hashtag activism and the configuration of
counterpublics: Dutch animal welfare debates on Twitter. Information, Communication &
Society 24(12): 1694–1711.

3234

new media & society 26(6)

World Health Organization (WHO) (1946) Constitution of the World Health Organization (WHO).
Global Health & Human Rights Database. Available at: https://www.globalhealthrights.org/
instrument/constitution-of-the-world-health-organization-who/
Young IM (1989) Polity and group difference: a critique of the ideal of universal citizenship.
Ethics 99(2): 250–274.
Young R, Tully M and Dalrymple KE (2018) #Engagement: use of Twitter chats to construct
nominal participatory spaces during health crises. Information, Communication & Society
21(4): 499–515.
Zeitzoff T (2018) Does social media influence conflict? Evidence from the 2012 Gaza conflict.
Journal of Conflict Resolution 62(1): 29–63.

Author biographies
Anita KC Liu, MA, is a PhD Candidate at the Department of Communication at the University at
Buffalo, State University of New York, studying political and health communication.
Yotam Ophir, PhD, is an Assistant Professor of Communication at the University at Buffalo, State
University of New York, studying political and science communication, misinformation, extremism, and media effects.
Dror Walter, PhD, is an Assistant Professor of communication at Georgia State University,
studying political communication, extremism, and social networks.
Itai Himelboim, PhD, is the Thomas C. Dowden Professor of Media Analytics and an
Associate Professor of Advertising at the University of Georgia, studying political and global
communication.
Shu-An Tsai is a PhD Candidate in the Department of Political Science at the University at
Buffalo, State University of New York, studying East Asian politics, American politics, and
voting behavior.

